- The following is a conversation
with Don Lincoln, a particle
physicist at Fermilab,
who has spent decades
working at the frontier of
high energy physics. This
was a mind-blowing and
inspiring conversation. Don
turned out to be one of my favorite
people to talk to about physics.
Truly a unique mind with
that Richard Feynman ability
of taking very complicated ideas
and explaining them simply,
without losing any of the
essential, brilliant insights at
the core of those ideas.
This is a Lex Fridman
podcast. To support it, please check
out our sponsors in the description
where you can also find ways
to contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on. And now,
dear friends, here's Don Lincoln.
In describing the search for
a theory of everything in
physics, you describe the
history of physics can be told
effectively as a kind of
history of unifications.
There's this centuries-long quest
to show that these distinct
phenomena are actually linked by some
unified underlying principles
even starting with
Newton, that you can think of the effort
of physics as one is trying to unify-
... the laws of nature. So I was
wondering if we could talk through the
history of unification-
... that lens of physics.
- There are, of course, lots of different
ways to do physics, but the way
that I would say that particle
physicists, cosmologists do
is they are trying to really find
basically the underlying
principles that govern the laws
of nature. If we go back,
say, to the, I don't know,
1650s or so, you're the most
brilliant person around,
and you've noticed two things. One
you've noticed is that when you trip,
you fall. That is the nature
of gravity that we all
experience day to day. But then there's
sort of astronomy, where you look
out at the heavens and you see
the stars march across the sky.
You see the planets
move through the stars.
And there, that seems to have
absolutely nothing to do
with what happens when you drop your
sandwich and the dog grabs it from you. So-
... the brilliant thing was when Newton
looked at that and he thought about,
maybe the moon is falling, but it's
missing the Earth. So what we had is
that in maybe 1650, you
had what we might call the
laws of celestial gravity, the
gravity that governs the heavens,
and terrestrial gravity, the
gravity that is here on Earth. Now,
we don't think of it that way anymore.
We think of it as just gravity.
But at that time, that wasn't
at all obvious. And in fact, if
you look in the books, Newton's theory
is Newton's law of universal gravity.
The universal is there, and the
reason is because he realized these
two things that seemed to have
nothing to do with one another were
indeed one and the same. I mean, this
is absolutely brilliant. I mean, Newton
is arguably one of the most brilliant
humans of which I'm ever aware.
But at any rate, it is the first
sort of easily to describe
unification of physics that you
can state in a way that sort of
makes sense to modern-
... Humans. I mean, you can go back farther
than that, where people are talking
about chemistry, the nature of atoms.
You go back to Democritus, who was
wrong about very many things, but
the idea that there was a smallest
particulate form of matter is right.
So it's kind of funny. You talk-- You
read the chemistry books, and they say that the
idea of atoms goes back to Democritus, and,
you know, he, his idea was that,
like, there was a smallest atom of
oil, which was smooth, and it was smooth,
of course, because, well, oil is smooth.
There was a smallest atom of vinegar because
vinegar is tart and it pricks your tongue-
... so therefore, atoms were
little sharp, pointy things. Um,
and so he was wrong about a
lot, but he was right about the
idea that there was a small particle,
and we now know a very-- we have a
very different concept than he did.
So you can go back farther than that.
But getting the unification, there are
more examples. For instance, if
you go back to, say, 1830 or so,
scientists were trying to understand
electricity, for instance.
And there was a lot going on. People
really understood things. But at the time,
you would have two phenomena
that are familiar to us now.
One is a magnet, which, you
know, at the time, mostly
magnets were simply little pieces of
iron that had been magnetized and they
could stick to steel.
And then you had electricity, which was
at the time they were generating little
sparks that they could play
and, and have fun with, or more
broadly, a lightning bolt
blazing across the sky. And
so when you think about this, that
lightning bolt and that little
magnet seem to be really unrelated. Um,
but over the 1800s, a number of scientists
were exploring little aspects
of it. What happens when you
run electricity through a wire?
It seems to make a magnetic
field. You know, they, they-- There was a whole
bunch of experiments and there were a lot of names.
But in about the 1860s or so, James Clerk
Maxwell took all of those ideas that had
been percolating around for the previous
50 years and wrote his laws of
electromagnetism, and they're really
fascinating. If you look at the laws of
electromagnetism, they are-- they're
differential equations or inter-
integral equations. But basically,
what they say is on one
side, you have a bunch of terms
that have electricity in them,
and then you have equals on the
other side, a magnetism thing.
So forgetting all of the mathematical
symbols, you have electricity
side equals a magnetism side.
Electricity equals magnetism.
And that is a staggering
concept, the fact that these two
things, a lightning bolt and the magnet
that holds your kids' art to the
refrigerator, are one and the
same. And this was another case
where electricity and
magnetism became unified into
electromagnetism. So now we have two
examples: one, gravity being unified,
terrestrial and celestial gravity,
and then electricity and magnetism.
So I'll tell you about some more in a
moment, but one thing that's kind of
important because the
goal is, of course, to
unify everything. That if I could do what
I want to do, I would have some unified
theory that would explain all the behavior
of all energy, matter, space, and time,
which is a grand goal.
- And we should say that maybe
one of the goals of science
more broadly, outside of physics
even, is to construct models
that can generalize the world. So
if you look at Darwinian evolution-
... that was a very beautiful theory
that captures another layer of reality
of, like, how this particular thing
that we see here on Earth happens.
- Right.
- So when we talk about theory of
everything in physics, that's
capturing a different layer of abstraction
about the functioning of the universe.
- Right. The whole Darwinian
evolution, the fact that our
genetics has significant
overlap with the genetics of a
banana is pretty
staggering, is astonishing-
... that that works. So
that is amazing. But
for at least the class
of scientists that I am,
what we think of is,
well, sure, biology is
interesting and all, but when
you get right down to it, it's,
it's caused-- whatever happens in
biology is caused by the movement of
molecules. And then you say, "Well,
that's great and all, but molecules,
they do what they do because
they're made of atoms."
And then the next step is, well, you know,
atoms, that's great, but atoms work the
way they do because of the nucleus and the
electrons, and then the nucleus is protons
and neutrons. And so there
are those of us, myself
included, who want to dig down
to the very, very bottom and
find out what is the smallest
building block of nature from
which all of these other far more complex
and interesting and abstract things are.
But what is at the very, very
bottom? And also, that's great,
but if you know what the smallest
building blocks are, that doesn't tell
you the story. It's like having
a whole bunch of LEGOs, but
not knowing how to put them together. You
also need to know how they interact, how they
work, and so that's why we study
forces. So there are the various
subatomic forces of which we're
familiar and for instance,
electricity and magnetism
are components of
electromagnetism, which then
governs the behavior of things
like-- This is amazing. Electromagnetism
explains, of course, electricity,
magnetism, but it explains how light works.
It explains how much of chemistry
works. So electromagnetism, 1860 or '70
the wonderful thing about that is
if you take Maxwell's equations
and you apply a little bit of
calculus, it's very easy to see
that the laws of electricity and the
laws of magnetism combined together
make what's called a wave
equation, which that shows
that these electric and magnetic
fields oscillate. They vary,
and if you have something that's
varied, that's a wave, and the
wave then moves. And if you do the
math, you find out that the speed
at which these waves move is
the speed of light. And so
people said, "Wow, the speed
of light comes out of those
equations." And that had
to be, I think, very
persuasive. And of course,
electromagnetism also plays a
really significant role in
chemistry because after all,
atoms are held together by
electromagnetic forces. There's more
to how atoms work. There is all
the quantum mechanics stuff.
But if you did not have electromagnetism,
or if electromagnetism was very
different, then atoms would be very
different. So it plays a very big role
in holding us together. So
it's a staggering advance in
science to have a good behavior on
that. And of course, being able to,
to tame electromagnetism is why
people can hear you when you do
your podcast because through the
miracles of the internet just--
or just electricity running the
computers. I mean, this is a case
if I can get on a small soapbox,
where people back then said, "Well, why
are you messing around with magnets and
sparks?" And who cares? Well, that very
fundamental digging into
the laws of nature has
spinoffs, and it has spinoffs-- One
of the big spinoffs is our entire
technological society. Without being able
to govern electricity, we'd still be
farmers and shoemakers in
cities. We certainly would not
have everything that we do, so
off my soapbox. But it's really a
lovely thing to show how this digging
into deep, fundamental, not understood,
mysterious things can, a
hundred or two hundred
years later, transform the
world. And the type of
science I do now, people often ask,
"Well, what good is knowing about how the
inside of atoms work, how
the inside of quarks work?"
And I don't know the answer to
that but just being a little more
pragmatic, if I go back, say, a hundred
years, where people were trying to
understand how the protons and neutrons
inside atoms held together,
how they split, how they,
how you could combine them
and so forth, this has led
to nuclear power. Now, whatever
you think about nuclear power, and
some people like it and some people
don't, but it is powerful. It
will generate energy for humanity, and it
may be that is the path that we take as
we move away from digging
fossil fuels out of the
ground. Humanity is going to need
power no matter what. Nobody is
going to go back to the way
things were in the 1700s.
And one enormous source
of energy that is there
for us to take if we so
choose is the modification
of the nucleus of atoms. Seemed to
have absolutely nothing to do with
anything, and yet it
provides humanity with an
opportunity, which of course requires
that we think carefully of how we do that
and if we want to, but it gives us
something that we didn't have before.
- Yeah, it's very clear that nuclear
fusion and nuclear fission will
unlock huge amount of energy
that's required for a
civilization to flourish, but
that's almost like near term.
Longer term, you can think about things
like we'll talk about dark energy crisis-
antimatter. Maybe if you figure out
some of the mysteries around
antimatter, that too would lead
to energy sources, how to
produce energy. That too might
lead to counterintuitive
propulsion systems-
... for us humans to travel through
the universe. Now, right now it seems
far-fetched, too expensive, too
complicated, too difficult, but
breakthroughs in fundamental
theoretical physics might
lead us to unlock some incredible
energy sources, incredible technologies
that will allow humans
to explore the universe.
And of course, we should also
mention that as always with
technology, it's a double-edged sword.
It will most likely lead to the
development of more dangerous weapons or-
... other sources of harm. And then we as
a civilization kinda have to walk that
line and hope we figure out how to do more
good than bad with the
technologies we build.
- Right. But we have to really
remember, while people worry
about nuclear weapons, which
are admittedly very dangerous,
and even nuclear power, which has
waste that has to be dealt with,
what science is doing is working out, finding
power that nature has presented to us.
This is not new. Fire
is like that too. Fire
can burn down your house or it
can cook your steak. Power is
like that, and that's just something
that we have to understand as
humanity, and that's why this needs to be a--
you know, when we talk about science, it has
to be a broad conversation
by all of society
because what scientists
can do is figure out how
the world works. Society has to
figure out how we wish to apply
that or not apply that.
- Also, solving the
mysteries and the puzzles
of the universe in itself
is effing awesome.
- It is. It is.
- So that means that's the thing
that makes us human in part is
looking at a thing and
saying, "How does this work?"
And then together a bunch of apes
get together, like poke the thing,
kinda shake the thing.
And then over time you have
rockets going all into space. You
build roads and bridges. You
build the internet. Anyway,
so we talked about Newton, we talked
about Maxwell. That takes us into
20th century in terms of unification.
There's a guy named Einstein-
... on whom you wrote a book, who did-
... quite a lot of progress
on the effort of unification.
- Sure. So Einstein, he's
a pretty amazing guy.
In 1905, he had his miracle
year where he wrote multiple
papers. The one that most people
know about is special relativity,
where he showed something that
makes no sense to anybody who's not
really dug into it very
hard, and that is that two
people experience time differently.
Time, you know, is a fascinating
thing. We don't really understand what
time is, which is weird. You'd think that that'd
be something we'd understand very well, but we
really don't. We know a
lot about it, but really
understanding it, not so
much. But Newton thought
that time was just universal
for everyone, so my time, your
time, some person's time on
Mars or on Alpha Centauri,
everybody experienced time the
same. What Einstein showed
was that that wasn't the case,
that different people moving at
different speeds with respect to one
another experience time differently, which
is absolutely a mind-blowing concept. Now,
most people think that Einstein then
said, well, he invented spacetime, that,
that space and time are the
same thing, and he was behind
that. But that actual insight came
from one of his teachers, a guy
by the name of Minkowski,
who looked at Einstein's
equations. Minkowski was a little bit more
mathematically inclined than Einstein,
and he saw that if you look at
the equations, you have basically
one person's space and
time equals some numbers
times this person's space
and time. And so that's kind
of a staggering thing. So that is where
Einstein and Minkowski really did this
unbelievable concept that space and time
are actually pretty much the
same thing. That runs afoul of
our understanding of how the
world works because time just
moves, it's continuous. We know
what it is at a visceral level
and an experiential level. We might not
understand it at a formal level, but we know what
time is. It's what keeps, makes
today today and not yesterday or
tomorrow. Space is a little different.
You can walk somewhere, you can walk
back, you can move around. You have more freedom
to move in space than you have to move in time.
You can always move forward in time. It's just
moving backwards that turns out to be a little more
difficult. But yeah,
Einstein's understanding
that that is the case, it caused everybody
to think about the world very, very
differently, and that was in 1908
when Minkowski really laid it
out in a strict spacetime.
- And that also led to the
work on special relativity,
led to the speed limit,
the speed of light.
- Well, it was a premise. He had two
premises. One was that the laws of
nature are the same for everybody, so
if you're moving at some speed, or
if I'm moving at some speed,
I can say I'm not moving and saying
you're moving at some speed.
That's not controversial.
That is what we call Galilean
relativity. It's from hundreds
of years ago. But what
Einstein said that was controversial
was that everybody measures
that the speed of light is
the same. Irrespective of
how we're moving with respect to each other,
you'll measure the speed of light to be a
number, I'll measure the speed of light to
a number, and that's very, very different
from what Newton would've said or
Galileo or any of the old guys.
And it was taking those two
things together that caused
all of the weirdnesses
of special relativity.
Now, you could then very
easily say, well, that
second premise that everybody measures the
speed of light to the same is just dumb,
and that, you know, you
could test that. So
that's where testing relativity
comes in. And Einstein's
equations, which include
those two assumptions, it
predicts the behavior of everything
perfectly well. Now we've actually measured,
done experiments where we can say that
the speed of light is the same for
everybody. That's not how that's
been in the beginning. It was really
that assumption leads to predictions. The
predictions are true, so the assumption is true.
Now, there is a-- for those people,
for your viewers who wanna say, "Well,
how do you measure that the speed
of light is the same for everyone?"
The particle physicists do
this, and the way you do this
is the following: There are
some subatomic particles
that when they decay, they emit
light. That's their decay product.
And so you collide two things together so
you know when the particle was created,
then you have surrounded your
collision point by a detector,
and you measure how long it takes
for light to get to your detector,
and by God, it's the speed of
light, which it should be.
However, sometimes in these
collisions, some of these
subatomic particles you make are
coming out at very high speed. They
might be coming out at ninety-five or
ninety-seven or very large
fraction of the speed of light,
and then they decay into photons. And so
you measure how long it takes for the
photon to get to your detector, and it
says it's-- light travels at the
speed of light. Now, if it were that
if Einstein's conjecture was incorrect, you'd
have a particle coming out at near the speed of
light, it would be decaying into a particle
traveling at the speed of light, then that
particle should have traveled at, say, two times
the speed of light or something like that, so it
should have taken half as much time to
get to the detector, but it doesn't.
So this is a hard, serious measurement
that shows that something,
you know, we can measure the
speed at which light comes out of
this stationary created particle,
and it's the speed of light.
Then we can measure what the speed is of
it coming out of something that's moving,
and it's still the speed of light. So that
is an actual measurement, but that is not
something that was possible in
Einstein's day- ... but it is now.
- Just to take a small
tangent, how weird is it
in the full ranking of weirdness
that is physics, how weird is it
that there's that speed
limit of the speed of light?
- Well, I have to tell you, when I first
encountered this, it's pretty freaking weird.
It peaks the weird meter. But as
you become more familiar with
it, as you become more
comfortable with the idea, the
thing to remember is the speed of light,
it's the speed of light through spacetime.
Once you embrace that, that makes a whole
ton of sense. It all of a sudden makes
everything fall much more into place.
I think that there is an
ultimate speed isn't that
shocking. It just simply
says that it's a property of
space in the same way
that there is, you know,
space can transmit a certain
strength electric field. It can
transmit-- it can support certain
things. Whatever space is,
and we don't know what space is,
but whatever it is, it has the
capability of transmitting
these things at that one
speed through space or time,
and everything else comes from
our insisting that we keep
space and time different.
That's how I view it, and at least for me,
that once I accepted that, it
all became very comfortable.
- So the nature of my
question actually here-
... that will apply over and over is
trying to empathize, trying to put
ourselves in the shoes of the people
before space and time are unified-
... into space time and
really experience and
think through how difficult
of a leap is that.
- Huge.
- The reason I sort of say that is
we are now in the modern day
in the twenty-first century,
and of course, we're gonna have to
make leaps like that in our future.
So what are the unifications
we're not seeing in front of our
eyes? So for example, there's so many
examples through your work, through your
lectures of Paul Dirac
taking antimatter seriously.
Looking at what the math shows and saying,
"I really think this thing exists."
I mean, it just sounds insane.
- It does.
- And so I think this is a good
warm-up. The space-time unification-
... is a good warm-up as we march through
the twentieth century 'cause it gets
in my view at least, weirder and
weirder, even with Einstein himself.
- Well, let me give you an even more
basic example, sodium and chloride.
Sodium is an explosive metal. You
put it in water and it's kind of
neat. You put it in water, and it just, it
doesn't quite explode, but it gets hot, and
it pops around. Chlorine, it's
a gas. It's going to kill you.
So these two things are deadly. They're
awful. And yet when you mix them,
you put it on your food at night.
It's salt, right? And so this
is a case where, where this whole, A,
unification and B, this deeper
understanding, in this case of
chemistry, of how—Two things that
are dangerous can be brought together
and turned into something not only
innocuous, but necessary
for human life. And so this
is not unusual, what
you're describing. I mean,
when you think about it, forget about everything
else, just the fact that, you know, we tell
little kids, little kids, that
the world is made of atoms. Now,
that's crazy. Most people have never
seen atoms, and yet nobody really
doubts it anymore. And I
think it's just a case of
familiarity, and then the
culture slowly accepts it, and
it's then, it's real even without
the evidence. In fact, one of
the courses you described there, How
We Know What We Know, I think that's a
valid question. How do we know there are
atoms? And, and of course, there are ways we
do.
- And by the way, on that
front, I would love to go
through how we know the building
blocks in the universe as we
march towards quarks. That, in the course
that you mentioned, is one of the most
fascinating things of this philosophy of
atoms being around for a very long time.
Then you concretize and you
actually can prove or have
strong observations that indicate
that there is atoms, and then there
is a nucleus, there is electrons,
there is photons, there is quarks and
I mean, it gets weirder and
weirder, and now we're facing the
mystery is there's building
blocks even smaller than that.
But anyway, Einstein, turns out,
didn't just do special relativity.
By the way, I really think he deserves
three Nobel Prizes. He got it
for photoelectric effect. The fact
that he didn't get it for general
relativity is a crime against
humanity. I don't understand.
Obviously should have gotten it for general
relativity and, and special relativity.
I mean, I think special relativity is
separate for general relativity in
as far as Nobel Prizes go. So general
relativity is another unification.
- Yes, that's right. What Einstein realized
was that if you were in a rocket ship
and the rocket ship
was a very quiet rocket ship and it was accelerating,
it would feel like you were experiencing
gravity. And so as you say, it's one of
his happiest moments when he realized that
acceleration and gravity
feel very much the same.
What I'm impressed by is that idea,
which is already a pretty neat idea,
somehow led him to take his
space-time idea, take this
acceleration gravity idea, and realize
that he could describe
gravity as the bending of
space-time. Space-time being constant
like east, west, north, south,
that's already hard enough. But now he's
saying, "Well, you know, take your,
your map and crinkle it and bend
it," and so forth, and that's
gravity. That is a staggering,
mind-blowing idea.
- I guess, I wonder if you can
comment on what do you think is the
idea generation process that
leads to that. So probably an
Einstein case has to start
with what if gravity
is itself space-time geometry? You, you
have to have a thought like that, right?
- Yes, I think so. There's a lot about science.
There's, of course, knowing what went
before. There is knowing the
mathematics that allows you to figure
out the implications of your
theory. There is the discipline
to argue with yourself and other
people because most ideas are
wrong. But then there's what you just
described, that intuitive spark,
and that is something that
is very, very difficult to,
to create. There's a reason that
we venerate these people, is
because it is an unusual feature,
and most people only have that aha
moment once in their lifetime,
if they have it at all.
And then there's a tricky
business because I'm sure you do,
and I get a lot of letters from,
from creative thinkers who
don't have all of the history
and the mathematical
discipline and the self, you
know, self-critique that's
necessary. And so they come up with
these ideas, and often it's easy to
see where they just don't play out.
So in order to be that
person who changes the way
we see the world, ideas
themselves are not enough. These
creative ideas, that's not
enough. You need it with the
discipline and the critique, and
it's that amalgam of those things
that you know, make you a
genius that history remembers.
- But it's hard to know. In a
field of people you might
be tempted to call crazy, there could
be geniuses there, and it's hard
to know which is which. We should
mention that Einstein himself
couldn't see the genius in
quantum mechanics initially,
couldn't see the correctness,
I should say. So he could
see the insanity of gravity bending
space-time, but quantum mechanics
was too weird for Einstein.
- In all fairness, it's
weird for me too. But...
... but the thing is, even while
that is true, and Einstein
maybe spent the last few
years of his life trying to
blend electricity and
magnetism and gravity in a,
a single thing, and he was
unsuccessful, but he still was a
very, very valuable critic—
... of quantum mechanics. It's
not that he didn't understand it,
because he did understand it. He thought
about the implications and all this quantum
entanglement business, you know, not
all of it. But he was responsible
for saying, "Well, if you're
right, then this." And of course,
then people went out and found
out that, that Einstein's
implication of quantum mechanics was
real, and so they could say, "See?
Quantum mechanics is real." So, you know,
he was thinking deeply about it, and he
was doing exactly that thing I said.
There's that spark idea, but there's that
critique idea. And if you're able to
critique an idea, you might kill it.
And that is—it's always depressing
when I have this brilliant
idea and it gets killed, but it's
better to be killed than to keep
it around and waste time on it.
And so he was, in that case, not
generating the aha, what he was saying
is, "All right, let's take your aha.
Let's see it's right. What does it mean?
It means this." That allows people to go
test it, and so he was contributing very
crucially to that other part of scientific
advancement, which is not just the aha
moment, but the beat it to death, test it-
... critique it, and make sure it's real.
And it's only after all of that
has been done that you really
assure you're right. And
that's why science is such
a powerful tool. It is that, that
combative, just downright kinda
jerky critique that most people
don't like. They don't like people saying,
"Uh, your ideas, you know, might be
wrong." But that is-- it is crucial. It is
a crucial part of the scientific process.
- Plus, there's that quote on the
other side of it that I've heard you
mention, which is you know, "I believe your
idea is crazy, but is it crazy enough?"
Was that Niels Bohr?
- I love that one. Yes, yes, we all agree that
your idea is crazy, but is it crazy enough?
- And there is some degree of
taking those leaps of crazy,
but it has to be backed with rigor.
- Right.
- And the unifications continue that as we
take steps towards the Standard Model-
... which is such an incredible part of physics
in the 20th century. So can you describe
that unification?
- So, you know, we're sort of jumping forward
here now to the 1930s or thereabout.
And at, by that time, people
had realized that there are
four distinct forces that do not seem
to be connected. One is gravity,
two is electromagnetism, and those are
things people are relatively familiar with.
But there are two other forces
that only have any real
importance inside the nucleus of
atoms, which is why most people
have no experience with them.
One is the strong nuclear
force, which holds the nucleus of the atoms
together, and the other one is what we
call the weak nuclear force, which
is responsible for some types
of radioactivity. And since
most people don't play
around with nuclei, and most people don't play
around with radioactivity, they don't know what
that is. But by the '30s,
scientists had done enough
experiments, done enough theorizing
to say that there were
these four forces, and
that was already a triumph.
I mean, we, in our goal for
a theory of everything, we'd like to think that
there is one force, which is what we're talking
about, the unification. Maybe these
four forces are just different ways
of looking at a single underlying
force. But in the '30s,
that's where we were. There were
the four forces. So we move ahead,
and in the late '50s and early
'60s, some people were thinking
that maybe the weak nuclear force and
electromagnetism actually were the same.
So they were working on trying
to bring together these
two forces to show that they're connected.
And it came true. They
were able to show that
electricity and magnetism
were actually two
different facets of a single force that
we now call the electroweak force.
Now, the story that you're told in
articles about this, about what
people have called the Higgs
boson or the God particle, the
story is very, very simplified
because in 1964, there were three
groups with six individuals
who came up with important
papers talking about
what's called the Higgs field. And I'll get back, get to
what that is in a minute, but the Higgs field is important.
But it wasn't until 1967,
so three years later,
that Steven Weinberg and some others
actually unified electromagnetism
and the weak force.
- Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven
Weinberg successfully unified
electromagnetism and the weak nuclear
force that showing that at high energies-
- Right
- ... these two forces were merged
into a single electroweak force.
- Right, and that was in '67,
all right? Everybody talks
about this thing happening in '64,
but it really wasn't. It happened
over quite a few years
actually. But all right, so now
let's-- what you said is true. So
Weinberg, Glashow, and Salam showed that
electromagnetism and the weak force
at high energies were the same.
There was a problem,
however, and the problem
is that electromagnetism
has an infinite range,
And we know that because we can see
stars that are millions of light-years
away. I mean, that shows you that the range
of that force is essentially infinite.
The weak force, however basically becomes
nonexistent on distances much smaller
than the size of a proton.
So that, you know, to say, "Oh, they're
the same," and yet one can reach
across the universe and one can't reach
out of an atom, well, that's just
dumb. I mean, the obvious
thought here is, well, we just
proved that that whole idea is
stupid, so throw it away.
Ridiculous. And that
is where these ideas from 1964
came in and saved the day. So
how can it be true that the electroweak
force is real and electromagnetism
and the weak force act so differently?
The way that could happen is if
these forces were transmitted
by a particle moving from one
subatomic particle to the other.
In the case of electromagnetism,
it's the photon.
In the case of the weak
force, we call them now
the W and Z particles. So the idea is
that Higgs and his colleagues came
up with is saying, "All right,
electroweak force is real.
The way we make it so that
there is now an electromagnetic
force and a weak force is the force-carrying
particle of electromagnetism has no
mass. The force-carrying
particle of the weak force has
a mass." And so what
was done is a field was
postulated that there was
this additional field
that was kind of distinct
from this electroweak field,
and we call it the Higgs field. And the
Higgs field permeates all of space.
And here's the kicker, some
particles interact with the
field, and some particles don't
interact with the field. The ones
that interact with the field get
mass, and the ones that don't
interact with the field
don't have mass. And
so that's the idea, is that the Higgs
field gives the weak force particles mass.
However, the photon laughs at the Higgs
field, doesn't see it, and it has no mass.
- And I should say here, going
to Perplexity, the big-picture
view, the Higgs field is the quantum
field that fills all of space and gives
many elementary particles, just
as you're saying, their mass
through their interaction with it.
The Higgs boson is the particle
associated with ripples or
excitations of this field.
In modern particle physics, every type of
particle corresponds to a field that exists
everywhere. The Higgs field
is one such scalar field,
meaning at each point in space,
it has a single numerical
value rather than a direction.
The Higgs field differs
from most other fields
because even in empty space,
empty in quotes, by the way,
empty space, its average
value is not zero. This non-zero
vacuum value is what enables
it to endow particles with mass.
- Right. So let's talk about something
a little more familiar just to try
and hang some, some
intuition on those words.
- Mm-hmm. Awesome.
- All right, so right in front of us,
there is a gravitational field. Now-
... you can't see it, but right
there. Right there. Check it out.
- Yep.
- If I were to take something, a pen
or whatever, and put it there,
it feels a force, and it falls.
Very insightful, I know. So
we have the gravity field,
and we have the pen that has a
mass, and the mass and the gravity
field interact, and it drops.
Now- ... if we had another-
- I have a-
- Oh, yes
- ... object for you.
- All right, so like-
- Demonstration purposes. This is great.
- Performance art. Here we go.
- This is great.
- This thing has mass, and we drop it.
How remarkable. It falls. But
when we step back and think about
what really happens, it's
the mass of this thing
and the interaction with
this invisible field we see
here. That's what gives this weight.
Now, I have this particle here that you
can't see, but it's there. It has no mass.
And I leave it there. Well, since it has
no mass, it doesn't feel gravity. It's
still floating there. And that is
really all the Higgs field is. Some
particles have effectively what you
could call the Higgs charge that
interacts and sees the field,
and other particles don't. And
and that is really what you read just
basically means. Now, it's
kinda neat because in the
ordinary day, there is a Higgs field
right there, and the Higgs field is
not zero, just like gravity is not
zero, and things will get mass. But
at super high energies,
the Higgs field, the strength of the Higgs
field goes to zero. So whether things have mass
or whether they have a Higgs charge or
not, they have no or they have the Higgs
charge, Higgs field zero,
they don't interact. It has no
mass. So that's kind of what,
uh, Weinberg and Salam and Glashow
said, is at very high energies,
the Higgs field is zero.
Since the Higgs field is zero,
the weak force particles don't
feel mass, and therefore, they can travel
at the speed of light, just like the
photon does, and everything's happy.
It is when the universe cooled
down. After the Big Bang, it
was very hot, very high
energy. Nothing had mass.
The universe cooled, and
at a certain temperature,
what happened is the Higgs field turned
on. And at the moment it turned on,
it gave mass to the weak force
particles, did not give mass to the
photon. So that's what we call
electroweak symmetry breaking,
so it's a mouthful. But all it
says is there was a moment in time
early in the history of the universe at
10 to the minus 12 seconds after the Big
Bang, the Higgs field turned on and
particles got mass. So that's the whole
idea. So this is another
really neat thing. So the
electroweak symmetry theory
doesn't need Higgs because that
only really applies at
very, very high energies.
But in order to make it work
at low energies, you need
to fix the theory, and you
need to fix the theory by
effectively putting a Band-Aid on
the theory. Higgs theory is just
a Band-Aid on top of electroweak
symmetry theory, and
that is the Band-Aid that fixes it because
it gives mass to particles at low energy.
- But how does then the Higgs—
this Band-Aid, the field and
the Higgs boson come into play on the
experimental front, on the evidence-
- Okay.
- ... discovery front?
- Right.
- So what is this Higgs boson thing then?
- Okay, excellent. So we have never
seen the Higgs field. Higgs field
is a hypothetical theoretical
thing. But that is true
of most of our fields. We've never seen the
electromagnetic field. We've never seen the
gravity field. We've seen the effect
of the field. And so all of these
theories are now what we call
quantum field theories, and that--
the whole idea of quantum fields,
if you have a quantum field,
but that field can vibrate
like a drumhead. And so it
doesn't vibrate just exactly like a
drumhead, but it vibrates locally. So you
can have specific localized
vibrations, and those
specific localized vibrations are the
particles. In the electromagnetic field,
the vibration is the photon. In the Higgs
field, the vibration is the Higgs boson.
And so what we can do is not
see the field, but we can
actually excite the field, make it vibrate,
and detect the vibrations. So the Higgs
boson idea was predicted
in sixty-four. It became
useful in sixty-seven, and then
scientists started looking for it. So
in the early 2000s, people were starting
to think that we had built particle
accelerators powerful
enough to actually to
be able to create these
vibrations and detect them.
So the accelerator that was
working at the time was
a large particle accelerator outside
Chicago at Fermilab called the Tevatron.
And we were colliding protons and
antimatter protons at near the speed of
light at very high energy,
and that was the accelerator at which the
top quark was discovered in ninety-five.
But we had upgraded our
apparatus. We had ten
times the number of collisions per
second. We had slightly more energy,
and we were banging the protons and
the antimatter protons together,
hoping that we would actually
find the Higgs boson.
- Can you actually back up a little bit
and look at the bigger picture? So
Fermilab has this legendary
accelerator that there's
also a personal story with you connected
to it because, I mean, there's a million
questions I wanna ask you, and
we'll ask you about some aspects of
that. So this idea of an
accelerator, the design and the
physics of an accelerator, how is
that productive for understanding
and discovering different
aspects of particle physics?
- Well, I'm so glad you asked I mean,
this is fascinating. All right.
Everybody has heard Einstein's
equation E equals MC squared. Nobody
knows what it means. Maybe they heard that energy
equals mass and mass equals energy. I don't know.
You know. But they've heard the equation,
the most famous equation in all of science.
But buried inside that equation is a really
thoroughly fascinating concept, that
energy and matter are equivalent, and you
can, in fact, convert movement energy
into mass. And so this is something
that we've known for a long time. This
was predicted back in basically 1928,
so a long time ago, actually
almost a hundred years ago. And
it is not in the slightest bit
controversial. We can do this all the
time. So the simplest thing is to take two
particles that have no structure, so, you
know, the closest thing you can
have to BBs that are just true
mathematical BBs. If you smash
those two things together,
it's coming in with a huge amount of energy
from one direction, a huge amount of
energy from the other direction.
The directions cancel, so the
net momentum, the net energy of this
has no motion. So you have these two
things coming in with a, you
know, exactly balanced energy,
and if they collide, they could stop.
Well, that energy has to go
somewhere, and that energy
can literally create
mass, create particles.
Now, there are special rules about
what happens. If you have two things
coming together and it creates a
particle, it has to create an antimatter
particle to balance it. That's just
kind of the rules of the laws of
nature. Why is that the case?
Well, we have some ideas,
but in many respects, the answer is
because those are the laws of the
universe, and that's the things
that we try to understand.
But this is absolutely true. So what,
what particle accelerators do,
among other things, is simply
transform energy into particles.
And so basically, any particle
that doesn't exist in nature, we
can make in this way. You can
make the antimatter electron
by taking two particles,
smashing them together. The energy
sits there, and it will make an
electron and an antimatter electron,
and it just does. And we know
that. The antimatter electron
was discovered in 1932.
This is all pretty easy.
The antimatter proton was
discovered in 1955 at
the Berkeley Bevatron.
And so this is just what
you do. You can convert
energy into a matter-antimatter
particle. Now, the
converse goes true, and that's something we
might talk about. You can take matter and
antimatter and bring it together,
and it'll make energy. It's the
the process can go both ways. Energy
can make matter and antimatter.
Matter and antimatter can make energy,
and this is just true. We do it
all the time. There's no
question that this is the case.
- And we should also mention that
this is the reason why Fermilab
had a nice stash of
antimatter particles. So
as a side effect, you can also collect
antimatter in this kind of way.
You can produce antimatter, but
it's at an extremely costly-
- Oh, very, very costly. In
order at, at the Fermilab
machine, we would have to smash
100,000 protons into something
to make one antimatter proton.
So I mean, it took some work.
- Is there some extremely precise recipe of
being able to produce particular kinds of
particles and all this kind of stuff?
When you smash two things together,
together, is there like how
can you control accurately
which kind of particles
you're trying to produce?
- If you wanna make antimatter
electrons, you smash together
energy at a certain-- It's just
easier with electrons because the electrons,
to the best of our knowledge, have
nothing inside them, so they're
simple. They have a certain mass,
and that's that. So if you smash particles
together with the right energy, you
can make them very, very easily
because you can-- It's like a old
style radio back in the day where you had
to dial it in. You could get right on the
station, and you could hear the, the signal,
and if you were off a little, it didn't work.
The problem for things like protons
and so forth is they're not point-like
particles. They're kind of like garbage
cans full of stuff, and so it's very
difficult to make antimatter protons.
Now, you can get more of them
by increasing the energy at which you
collide two particles together. If
you're at below a certain energy,
the-- and say you collide two protons
together at kind of low energy,
you just don't have enough
energy to make an antiproton.
And so it doesn't happen. You get
to a certain energy, and you can
just barely make them. The more
energy you collide them together,
the more you make. So that is just
sort of how it works. More is better.
- And then with CERN, if you
compare maybe CERN and
Fermilab, going to Perplexity
here, CERN's accelerator, the
Large Hadron Collider, LHC,
is the world's highest energy
proton collider, while Fermilab's
current and planned accelerators
focus on intense proton
beams for neutrino physics-
- Correct
- ... rather than pushing the absolute
energy frontier. Absolute energy
frontier meaning highest possible
energy smashing of protons together.
- Correct. So one, we were talking
about, like, accumulating antimatter.
All right? And so there, that
is typically making antiprotons,
as opposed to making all
particles in general. So let's focus
on the antiproton side to begin with.
All right?
So Fermilab doesn't make antiprotons
anymore. We stopped making them in 2011,
and it's because we shut our big
accelerator down to concentrate
on a different facet of particle physics.
However, at the time, we would smash
protons with an energy of 120 GeV,
and in that, we would make antiprotons.
So that's a ton of energy.
It's true that the CERN
accelerator, the big accelerator,
is now much higher energy than
the Fermilab accelerator was. No
problem. But that's not
how they make antiprotons.
The-- A-all of these big
beam big laboratories,
it's not one accelerator. At Fermilab, there
were five distinct accelerators, and it
was basically like shifting an old standard
car, 'cause you couldn't just go zero
to super speed in one accelerator.
You had to go from one to another,
getting higher and higher.
Well, at CERN, they use
one of the, basically their
second gear in their very
big accelerator complex to
make antimatter protons, and
their accelerator is only 26 GeV
compared to the 120 GeV at Fermilab.
Fermilab's not operating, but when
it was operating, it operated at
an energy about four times higher
than what CERN is doing now.
And why is that? Well, it's
because what CERN needs to do
is to not make as many
antiprotons as Fermilab did.
They are doing a very different current
experimental program. They're doing
a fascinating experimental program,
including trying to figure out does
antigravity fall up or down, which is
kinda neat. And we sort of know the answer
to that. That's separate. But anyways, so
getting back to the antiproton business-
... while Fermilab doesn't do it
now, it was top dog. It's not
anymore. The only really big antiproton
accelerator creator is a
small accelerator at CERN.
Okay, so that's the antiproton thing, and if we
get back to antimatter, we can talk about that-
... 'cause that is way cool.
- Yeah, super cool.
- But now the other side of
your thing about making
high-energy unknown
particles, bigger is better.
And it is true that the LHC is a
very high-energy machine. It is
about seven times more powerful
in terms of energy per
collision. It is also about 100 times more
collisions per second than the Fermilab
machine. So it is true that the LHC can make
bigger, heavier particles that the old
Fermilab, the Tevatron, ever could.
And that is true. So if you wanna look
at high-energy stuff, yeah, you go to
CERN now, which is why many of my
colleagues, including myself, once we had
measured all of the sort of
frontier measurements we thought we
could make with the Fermilab
accelerator, we saw
this bigger, more powerful machine with
seven times the energy and 100 times
more collisions per second. We
said, "Heck yeah, let's go work
on that." And to give you a sense of
scale, the top quark, which is the
heaviest particle ever discovered,
discovered at Fermilab in
1995, there were two discovery
papers, and the one on which I was a
co-author, we had worked
for a good chunk of
between six months and a year of
collecting collisions, and there were
a lot of collisions, and our paper had 38
top quark candidates. 38. And we knew that
half of them were crap because when you
make a detector like that, there's what you
call background, so you have the background and
the good stuff, and we know it was about 50/50.
So we had maybe 19 top
quarks after working
for between six months and a year of
collecting data. But now, at the LHC,
we make a top quark every
second. And that's what
higher energy and more collisions per
second will do for you. That extra energy,
you're above threshold, you make a
ton of them, and when you compare
the 1995 Fermilab
accelerator to the current
CERN accelerator, it's probably 1,000
times of collisions per second.
So it went from
painstaking, pulling teeth,
to, yeah, now top quarks are a background.
We try to get rid of them. There's just
too many of them. They get in the way
of searching for the stuff we really
wanna search. They are,
like, so 30 years ago.
- By the way, is there something to be
said about the kind of sort of signal
processing here, how you remove the
noise, how you remove the background,
how you determine which particle is which?
There's probably some, like,
incredible nuance there,
even outside of the scope
of this conversation.
- So let me just throw some numbers
out, all right? So at the
CERN accelerator, when it's
operating, the collisions occur at a
prodigious rate. We get about a billion,
with a B, collisions per second.
Now, each one of those
- Wow.
- Yeah, yeah, that's what I said.
- Now, it turns out some of them are happening
at the same time, so there's about, of
order 40 million moments in time per
second where you would take a shot,
and inside that moment, there
might be 20 collisions.
So that's why we get to the billion.
- Yeah, but can you individually
pinpoint the collisions?
- Sort of, to a degree. So
the beams are, you know...
When people think of beams, they think of,
like, laser beams, but that's not really what
particle beams look like. Particle
beams look like little tiny
sticks of spaghetti, except they're much
thinner. They're not as fat as a stick of
spaghetti, and they're
at the LHC, different
accelerators are different, they're about
this long. And so you have one of them going
one way full of protons--
...and another one going the other way full
of protons, and they pass through each other.
And as they--
...pass through each other, you should
think of this as like a swarm of bees.
- Yep.
- And this is like a swarm of bees, and
mostly the bees pass through each other and
don't do anything. But every so often,
some of the bees hit nose on and
stripes and wings and
everything everywhere.
- That's awesome. That's awesome.
- And so as they collide through each
other, you know, one collision's
here, and one's here, and one's
here. And you can't tell too much
side to side because the beams are really
small. They're sort of the thickness of a
human hair.
But you can see along the direction. And
they're, you know, this is about the
right size. And so we have
detectors around them, and
we can actually see, oh, particles came
from here, and particles came from here.
And that's amazing. All right. So
at any one crossing, there's
maybe 20 collisions. Now, most
collisions are absolutely
boring. They're boring
because they are-- they
exemplify physics that
we know a great deal about
already. We've tested it for
decades. We know all about it. We
don't care. I mean, it's kind of
blasé that we can say, "Oh, yeah, yeah,
we're making a billion subatomic particles
every second," but who cares because,
you know? But that's just the way of,
you know, frontier scientists.
So what you need is you
need to pick out the cool ones, the
weird ones, the ones that nobody's seen
before. And so what happens is,
these things, these beams collide,
and we surround the collision
point with an enormous
detector. There are two absolutely
ginormous detectors at the
LHC, one of them called CMS,
which is the one I'm on,
and the other one is called ATLAS--
...which is the other one and we don't
speak of-- no, they're both really amazing.
- Okay. It's good to know that there's
friendly competition even inside CERN.
- Yes, yes.
- That's awesome.
- I mean, the fact is they are both
amazing, absolutely amazing detectors.
- Right. But CMS is just a
little cooler than ATLAS.
- Oh, yeah, yeah. I mean, you know,
in particle physics, we really
absolutely want our competitors
to do extremely well,
just not quite as well as we do.
- Got it.
- Yeah, yeah.
- All right.
- So-
- So these two giant detectors.
- Right. So, but one of them, our detector,
the CMS detector, it's the small one.
It is 70 feet long, 50 feet
high, 50 feet wide. It's
five stories tall. It weighs 14,000 tons.
- Mm-hmm. Small one, yep.
- Small. ATLAS experiment is 150 feet long,
80 feet across. It weighs only 7,000 tons.
Just piece of cake.
You could take the ATLAS detector, and
you could put four of them on a soccer or
a football field, and it would fill the
field up with just enough room on the
sidelines for the cheerleaders and the water boy
and the coaches and stuff. That's how big they
are.
- Nice.
- So these are absolutely ginormous
detectors, and basically they're cameras,
and what they can do is they can
take pictures 40 million times per
second. Now, all the data comes
streaming off that detector, and
we can't record it all. It would just fill up all of
our tapes, and it would be full of all these boring
things we don't care about. So what we do
is as the beams pass through one another,
we teach our detectors to say, "We only
want one where there are certain
configurations that might be
interesting," like there's gobs
of energy in the detector,
or there's a gob of energy on one
side and nothing on the other
side, or there's four gobs of energy or
whatever. These are called triggers.
And so these-- what we have is
fast electronics that take the
40 million possible pictures per second,
and it says, "You know, about 100,000 of
those are really cool. We should
think about them." And then
it passes not all of the
40 million, but those
100,000 to the next level, which are
commercial processors that have,
Basically our final analysis code, but
optimized to run very, very quickly.
And what they do is they do a really
quick and dirty analysis
to say, to further
refine what's good and what's not. And
that, that computer farm then accepts about
1,000 collisions per second, and we record
those for further analysis. So that's
what's really happening. Of the 50
million possible collisions per second,
the fast electronics and then the
computers pick the thousand.
And then we pass those
through analysis software and hand them to the graduate
students, and they pick through them, looking and
finding the handful that are
the next Nobel Prize. So that's
how that works, and that, that
is truly astonishing. I'm--
hats off to the accelerator
builders, the detector builders,
the people who make the software
work, the people who make the
not gigabytes, not terabytes,
but petabytes of data flow
around the world seamlessly. It's
really amazing. I'm very grateful.
- So take me to July 4th, 2012,
the discovery of Higgs boson.
- So this is really fun
because the people searching
for the Higgs, it's a community, and
the entire community knew that the LHC
was coming online. So even though
many of us had been working
on the Fermilab accelerators, a lot
of us were transitioning to the CERN
accelerator. So we were in
the very funny business of
wearing our Fermilab
detector people hats, trying
desperately to find the
Higgs boson at Fermilab-
- Mm-hmm while simultaneously wearing
our CERN hats, knowing that CERN
was going to be able to find it if existed.
And so, you know, we were a little
neurotic, kind of wanted, you
know, our, our old stuff to work
and, and there was an awful lot
of people on both experiments.
Did you have a sense that one of the two
places would be able to find the Higgs?
First, did you think the Higgs boson
existed, and second, did you
think that these accelerators
have the chance to find them?
- So I was cognizant of the fact
that the Higgs boson might not
exist, but there was a lot of evidence
pointing in the direction that it might be.
I knew that both experiments,
the Fermilab accelerator
and the CERN accelerator, would either
find or rule out the Higgs if it existed.
- Rule out?
- Well, that's a possibility. I mean-
... maybe the Higgs theory was wrong.
Right? Until you, till you know it's there,
it might be wrong. It's like dark matter.
People talk about dark
matter, it might not be real.
I mean, I-- it probably
is, but it might not be.
- So you knew at these energy levels, you
would be-- you should be able to find-
- Yes
- ... the Higgs boson.
- Yes. So that's the nice thing
about this kind of physics,
because there was a theory,
that theory made predictions.
Now, there were parameters in the theory
we didn't know. If the mass was this,
we'd get this thing. If the mass was this,
we'd get this thing. But we could do the
the calculation for every
conceivable Higgs mass, and
so then we could search. Look,
well, let's say the Higgs mass is
100 in some units. Did
we see it there? No.
Then it's not 100. Well,
let's look at 103. Is it
there? No. So we could do
that. Both accelerators
could either find it or
definitively rule out the
predictions of simple Higgs
theory, 100% guaranteed.
However, the CERN accelerator had 10
times the collisions per second and three
and a half times the energy.
So remember when I said it-- with the
top quarks, it was, like, six months for
19 versus one a second? There's no
question. The writing is on
the wall. The Hi- the, the
LHC was gonna have an easier time of it-
... if it was real. However, so but,
you know, I'm a Fermilab scientist,
and we wanted Fermilab, you know, come
on, we want Fermilab- ... to win.
- Of course.
- Not, you know. So we were busting our
butt, and we had done what I said. We
had ruled out this region.
We had certain mass ranges.
We knew it wasn't there. And
we finally said, if there
was a Higgs boson, if it existed,
which we didn't know at the
time, its mass was somewhere
between, if I recall, between,
like, 120 and 145. All right? We'd
ruled out all the other stuff.
And so wearing our CERN hat, we said,
"Okay, we're gonna find that." But we were
really, really, really trying to do it.
Now, if we had had another
two years or maybe three
years of running the Fermi accelerator,
Fermilab would have discovered or ruled
out, or in this case, it turned out,
discovered the Higgs boson, 'cause it's a
real thing. We would have found it without a
question. But we didn't have enough data
in July of 2012. We needed a couple
more years. Unfortunately,
in 2008, or fortunately, the
LHC had turned on. It broke. They
had to fix it. Turned on again in
2010. It ran poorly in 2011. In
2012, they pushed up their sleeves
and said, "Let's do this,"
and it turned on. And so,
you know, there was this--
the Fermilab knew if it didn't
have it now, it wasn't--
it was too late. Anyways, come 2012
rolls around, and like two days before,
The announcement at CERN was July
4th, so two days before that,
Fermilab made a measurement
and said, "We can rule out
certain regions, but certain
regions we can't rule out. But what
we know, and this is
important, if the Higgs boson
exists, it must be in this region for which
we are not capable yet of ruling out."
So that's where we were two
days before the LHC said,
"We got it." That was July 4th, 2012.
- So detecting the Higgs boson confirmed the
existence of the Higgs field,
the mechanism through which
fundamental particles like electrons and
quarks acquire mass in the standard model.
- Correct. Although, let's be very specific
of what we did then. We found a particle
consistent with the existence
of the Higgs boson.
There were alternative theories at
the time that predicted not one,
but multiple Higgs bosons.
So there's a theory called
supersymmetry, which said that
there was not one, but five Higgs
bosons. The standard original
1964 Higgs theory says there
was one. And so all we really
knew at the time was we
found a theory. We did not
necessarily confirm that Higgs was
right. We found data that said
that it looked like Higgs
was right, but until we ran for longer, we
were unable to rule out other alternative
theories. So that's the deal.
Now, in the fullness of time, it
is after all what, 14 years now later, we
have been able to basically rule out
some of those other things, and by
now we have validated things.
We found the mass of the
particle. We know the spin
of the Higgs boson. It has
a spin of zero. We have
discovered the Higgs
boson decays. It
preferentially decays into the
heaviest particles it can
through energy conservation.
Can't decay into top quarks, it's too
light to decay into top quarks, but it can
decay into bottom quarks.
It can decay into W and Z
particles, can decay into a
weird way into photons. And
we have looked for all of the hypothesized
decays of the original Higgs theory-
... and we have validated
that it decays in those ways
at the rates that theory
predicted. And so now
in the fullness of time, I'm pretty
comfortable saying Peter Higgs
and Robert Brout and François Englert and
his colleagues, they were right back in the
'60s. But we weren't sure on July 4th. All
we knew was we found a particle
consistent. But the thing is, with
these discoveries, they're often
just barely discoveries. It takes a
while to go and do the more complex,
detailed measurements and that's what
we've done.
- So at the time, I remember it being
called referred to as the God particle.
Uh, you also had a minor in theology, so
throwing that all together, so
calling it the God particle is
speaking to the importance, the potential
importance of discovering this particle.
Do you think that is in some degree
justified? Like, if we look at the big impact
of it on the history of physics,
how important was it to find
and show that the Higgs field is real?
- Well, I don't think it is as important
as, for instance, some of Einstein's
stuff. I mean, it was-- it's an
important prediction. Like, the
prediction of quarks was very important
and interesting in validating this.
The Higgs was kinda like
validating that quarks
existed. It's an important
stepping stone, and I,
I do not wish to denigrate it
in any way, but there's ones
that changed the way we thought about
the world, like Einstein did. It
wasn't that sort of thing. And there is a funny
story. So the reason they call it the God
particle is this book by Leon
Lederman, and if you read his book, he
he says, "Well, you know, we call it the
God particle, but we should call it the
goddamn particle because it's been causing
us so much trouble trying to find it."
And Leon ran Fermilab, so— and he wrote
a foreword for one of my books and,
you know, I talked to him. He's
a-- he was a really funny guy.
And the real truth was the
book was called "The God
Particle" because his publisher
thought it would sell more copies.
But, you know, then that got into the mindset
of the reporters and so forth, and we
called it the God particle. Leon
never really thought of it as
anything to do with the religious or even— I
mean, the, he was an incredible jokester, the
goddamn particle.
- It is a really important part
of our model of the universe.
- It is.
- That there's this field that it gives mass
to some particles and not others, that's-
- Right. It-- I-- it's a huge
thing, but it was part of the
Standard Model. The Standard Model
had known forces, it had known
particles, it had all that. The,
the Higgs boson, the one thing that
is true is it was the last unvalidated
piece of the Standard Model. The
Standard Model does not answer
all questions, which is why we
have unanswered questions in
physics, but it was a punctuation
point, end of about 50 years of
discovery and searching, where we
finally were able to say the
Standard Model, while, while
incomplete, it's mostly
right as far as it goes.
- Quick 10-second thank you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It
really is the best way to
support this podcast. Go to
lexfridman.com/sponsors.
And now, dear friends,
back to my conversation with Don
Lincoln. We did a whirlwind tour
of the history of physics
and took a little
tangent on this incredible
discovery of the Higgs boson.
But we didn't go all the way
yet. There's this dream of the
grand unified theory, the GUT, that
is a step towards the TOE, theory of
everything. So can we talk about the GUT
first? So what, what's,
what's entailed in the GUT?
- So the GUT is short for grand unified
theory. We talked about that
there were four known subatomic
forces, the electromagnetic force,
gravity, the strong force, and the
weak force. And electroweak
symmetry unification
merged the weak force and
electromagnetism into the
electroweak force. So
what GUT hopes to do is
to merge the electroweak
force and the strong force
into one grand unified force.
Now, that leaves gravity outside
because gravity is seemingly
fundamentally significantly different.
Then subsequently, it is hoped
that a higher energy, we will be
able to blend the theory of
everything together with all of the
known subatomic forces, the strong,
weak, and electromagnetic forces, and
then gravity. But so, as you
say, GUT is sort of a, a, a
way station along the
way. That's the goal, and
at this point, I would have
to say that I do not see a
fast progress in the immediate future.
I think we're a ways away from
that at this point.
- You mean on the gravity front?
- Maybe we'll come up with something really
cool. We certainly had some ideas back
in the early '80s that we
tested, and they didn't pan out.
- Uh, speaking of which, string theory
is the thing you're referring to.
Uh, so string theory posits that
particles are tiny vibrating strings,
and by tiny we mean extremely
tiny at the scale of a
Planck length. Then there's
other leading candidates like
loop quantum gravity. Maybe
there's some alternate
theories in the works. So can you
link on that a little bit more?
Do you think a theory
of everything exists?
- So I hold personally that
there are rules that govern
matter and energy, space, time, and
they probably are rules that I don't
know. There are probably phenomena
I'm not aware of. But I do
believe that something, there are,
is a rule that governs reality.
And so in that sense,
once we understand the
rules that govern reality, the fundamental
rules, that would be a theory of everything.
You know, there are things that are unknowable,
like for instance, inside black holes, we
don't know what's inside there, but that doesn't
mean that there's not something inside there.
So there's a distinction between
what we can know and truth.
So I do believe that there are the rules,
and I do believe that with
sufficient time, technology, effort,
we will be able to figure this all out.
Now, this isn't a thing in my lifetime.
It's not a thing in my grandchildren's
lifetime or even their grandchildren's
lifetime.
- Whoa, whoa, whoa. That's a
pretty strong statement, right?
That's a pretty strong
statement saying we're,
we're fifty to a hundred years out
from finding a theory of everything.
- It took two hundred years to
go from unifying gravity to
unifying electromagnetism. It
took a hundred years to go from
unifying electromagnetism to unifying
the electroweak force. Now, you could
say, well, gee, that's went from two hundred
to a hundred, so it's getting faster.
But it's also getting harder
because the unification
scale is of order ten to the fifteen,
which we can do the math. That's
a quadrillion times higher
than the highest energy
accelerator we can build today.
And it was one thing to, you
know, we are reaching diminishing
returns. We get something
like a factor of seven
increase in particle
accelerator energy every twenty
years. And so we have to get
to a quadrillion times. Now,
you know, if you really did believe,
A factor of seven every twenty years,
then that's-- we're talking like five
hundred years. But you know, this is
like Moore's Law, that it doesn't
continue forever. We're not going to every
seven year-- I mean, every twenty years
get another factor of seven. So yes, I
think it's a very long time. That's my
prediction. You know, some people
are far more optimistic, and
we can talk about that.
- We should also, I should mention that I
guess your intuition behind that is not just
the part where you come up with
a theory that's beautiful and
seems to be internally
consistent, but you have to have
a theory that's making
falsifiable, testable predictions.
- Correct.
- And you have to have a feasible
engineering construction, a
methodology for creating an
experiment that tests that
prediction. So I think a
lot of your, this is fifty,
a hundred, two hundred years from
now, intuition is maybe about the
second part of that, which is like,
you need to have an experiment.
- Yes. Yes. But you know, let's say, I mean,
you alluded to super strings. I haven't answered
that question. I'll table that for a moment.
Super strings is a fascinating
idea. I don't believe it but
I love it. I hope it's true. And
there's a real, you know, aphorism,
and it says you should absolutely never
believe what you think. So even if you
think super strings is true, you shouldn't
believe it because it hasn't been tested.
Now, let's say super string is correct.
I mean, hypothesis, it's correct, hundred
percent correct. I don't know it's
correct, so I don't care. I
mean, you know, it could be
correct, but I don't, you know,
until it's validated, it's just a
wild-ass guess, you know? So
I, we have to have a way of
validating it. So yes, the empirical side
of it is important. I mean, you
could wake up tomorrow and have the
theory that is the perfect theory, but
if I can't prove it, I don't care.
- If we were to think, this is going back
to The Great Courses on the evidence for
modern physics- ... we're talking
about energy levels and tiny particles
to the degree where the kind of
prediction we would be making is not
accelerator-type predictions. So
it's probably going to be impossible to
build an accelerator that detects something
like a string. So you have to make
predictions about macro scale behaviors.
- That's another alternative.
- It's a different kind of prediction.
Do we even have intuitions about what kind
of predictions they would be? So one,
one of course, one of the lines of
intuitions has to do with black holes or in
the singularity. The physics of black
holes combine certain elements of general
relativity and quantum
mechanics. So there-
... you could see some kind of
predictions you could make,
But you can't really mess with a black hole.
It's not like you can create a black hole in
the lab.
- And the energies that we're talking
about, the sizes we're talking about are
inside a black hole, which you
can intrinsically never see.
So, you know, you can only see the outside
of a black hole, not the inside of a black
hole. So what you said, you did say
something that was incredibly important and
incredibly correct and probably
won't happen, but that's still
good, okay? So we have
two choices. When you
talk about superstrings, either superstrings
are correct and they're making predictions
up at the Planck energy scale, at
which point we have to somehow
build facilities that can
generate Planck energies. That's
possibility one. Possibility two is
this theory, which is currently only
applicable at Planck energy
scales, someone figures out a
way to take those equations
and solve them in a way that, say,
predicts the mass of the electron.
Mm-hmm. Right? And that
is a tricky business.
I am not a string theorist, so
I can't tell you that that's
likely, but I can tell you that they've
been working on it since the '80s and they
haven't gotten very far. Furthermore, if I
I think it's fair to characterize
that string theory is still
a vague idea, and that's
unfair, but let me tell
you why I say that because
what they have are
approximate solutions to
approximate equations
and that is already saying that we're a
ways away from really
getting a handle on that. So
yes, there could be some bright young
lad or lass out there, someone listening
to this podcast right now who figures
out a way to take superstring theory
and solve them in tractable ways
that makes predictions from the
scale at which they currently
apply down to measurable scale
today. And if that happens,
well, then I might retract my
question or my concept.
There's a reason why I
think that probably isn't
true. That's probably not
valid. So let me-- I, I
love this, all right? So
let's back up. I'm going to pitch. I
wrote this book for Oxford, Einstein's
Unfinished Dream, and Einstein's unfinished dream
was to come up with a theory of everything.
It was unfinished because,
well, it's unfinished.
And so the, the second part, the
tagline of that book is Practical
Progress Towards a Theory of Everything,
with the emphasis on practical
because when you read books about
theories of everything, when you see
podcasts, when you listen to YouTube videos
or whatever, they are often
written by theorists.
Mm. And theorists are-- they're big
idea people. They're very, very smart,
but there's a pragmatism
that is often missing in the
sense that they say, "Well, superstrings, look,
you know, have these little vibrating things,
and wouldn't it be cool?" And, you
know, but you gotta get to the
do you know it? So let's pretend
superstring theory or something like
it is correct. The energy scale at
which that should occur is of order,
um, 10 to the 15 times
higher, 10 to the 19 GeV.
We can currently do things at
10 to the fourth GeV, give or
take. So that is 10 to the 15. That's
a quadrillion times higher energy.
So what we are doing now is we
are looking at the world with our
very best measurements, and we
are trying to project out a
quadrillion times higher and figure
out a theory that explains everything.
Now, I have this-- I have a couple of
analogies, but I like this. Suppose that
you were some, you know, Joe
Australopithecus 2 million years
ago or something in Africa,
wandering around somewhere in
Kenya. Mm-hmm. Right? You're
about a meter in size, so you
can walk a meter. Meter scale is
like your scale. Mm-hmm. You can
walk 10 meters in every direction. That's 30
feet, no problem. You can work 100 meters,
300 feet. You can work 1,000
meters. That's half a mile. You can
work 10,000 meters. That's 60 miles.
100,000 meters is 10 to the
fifth and that's unlikely.
But the distance that we need
to go from what we can see to
the Planck scale, it's not 10 to
the fifth, it's 10 to the 15th.
So that means, in my analogy,
think about this guy who's
walking around Africa. Now, if he
walks, you know, 100 feet or something,
it looks a lot like what it is now. He
can make a prediction about what he sees,
and when he goes to that new place, it's
probably going to be okay. But if he
starts walking 500 miles east, well, he,
walking around the center of Africa,
has no concept of, for instance,
the Indian Ocean. He would
never predict sperm whales or
kraken. He would never predict
what it's like the bottom of the
ocean is going north.
He's in Africa. He would
never, ever have a clue about the Alps or
Antarctica. Going even smaller
distances, going a mile up,
things wouldn't be very different. But if he
goes 10 miles up, he wouldn't breathe and
he'd freeze. If he goes 100 miles
up, he would die. If he goes two
miles down, he would
roast. The point being is
we are like that
Australopithecus. We have a
realm that we can study, and we can even
predict to some validity what
would happen if we go some
distance away. But the
farther away we go, the
less and less our local prediction really
represents the reality of those
more distant times. And so
basically, his theory about
the world would be totally
bogus. So even if he had the best
theory, his theory would not have
anticipated the Alps. It would
not have anticipated penguins.
Right? Flamingos, not
there. You know? And that
is just the case. So now that's
what we're doing. We are
taking something and we have
reason to understand what we
know and we can predict a factor of 10
or 100. But I think it is the absolute,
the pinnacle of arrogance to think
that what we can do given the
understanding that we have from what
we've measured now and predict it out
a quadrillion times higher
than we can see now.
So my opinion, and this is partly
because I'm an experimentalist,
the correct way to make progress,
practical progress towards a theory of
everything is to look around
at the things that we don't
have answers to right now.
For instance, are there some
things smaller than quarks?
I don't know. Is dark matter
real? I don't know. If
it's real, what is it?
I don't know. Is dark energy real?
Yes, probably, but I don't know.
What is the nature of space
and time? I don't know.
But these are questions we can
explore, and I would expect, and this
is my prediction, that, all right, we're
gonna figure things out at a factor of
10 or 100 times better than we can do now,
and we might be able to do that in my
kid's lifetime or something
like that. But in order for us
to predict a quadrillion
times higher, I'm pretty sure
superstring theory is wrong. Not
because people aren't smart, but
because something new is going to happen.
I mean, if you were talking about
chemistry, you would have never
predicted nuclear physics, and that's
a small increase in energy, right?
The idea that there's something
in the nucleus of atoms that causes
the sun to burn, there's a reason why
people didn't believe, you know,
they calculated how old the
sun should be, and it should only be 10 million
years old because otherwise it would burn
out. Well, that's clearly wrong,
and it's wrong because of nuclear
physics. That is why I feel fairly
confident to say, while someone
could think, well, superstring
might be right or something, and maybe it's right, and
I hope it's right. It would be awesome if it's right.
But what are the odds when you're
making something with that
tiny lever arm, predicting
it out a quadrillion
away and say, "Oh, yeah, we got it
right." What are the odds? And my
answer is, you gotta be kidding me.
Now, I could be wrong, and I admit
that I could be wrong, but that's
why I think the real issue
is not the brilliance of
humanity. It's the stuff
we haven't found. We
don't know— I mean, the simple
one, I, and I'm saying it simple,
and it's not, but what is dark matter?
We don't have a bleeping clue. Not a
clue. We know a lot of what it isn't,
but we don't know what it is. And so, you know,
talk about superstrings. All right, well,
maybe dark matter fits in superstrings,
or maybe dark matter is governed
by a physics that is completely diametrically
opposed to the superstring concept.
- And allow me a bit of a thought
experiment here, a brief thought.
My intuition says that when you
propose a theory of everything,
the kind of prediction you want to make
involves a kind of leap of conceptual
understanding that Einstein did. So,
for example, you want to come up
with something like
spacetime and then gravity—
- Sure
- ...bends space, spacetime.
So it's not merely that you have this
beautiful mathematical framework, but
that framework allows you to rethink
how you see reality enough to make a
prediction that's about the macro world.
- I mean, to come up with something like
spacetime, you know, there's one idea,
for instance, to say that space and
time aren't real. They,
they emerge from entropy.
Yeah, that's a way of, a new way of thinking,
and maybe there's some validity, and I want
people to think about it. But
in the end, it's just an idea,
and that's the real key thing. And,
and as you say, it has to tie to a
macro world. You have to validate. If
you don't validate, it's a crazy idea.
Theorists are incredibly creative, smart,
wonderfully interesting
people, but I don't
care. I want a measurement that
validates the idea because
there are so many-- I mean, if
you read the, the journals, there
are so many theoretical papers with
all these nifty ideas that die.
You know one that was recently I
liked and, and might still be true
was that dark matter that, you know, our
simple model of dark matter is that there's a
subatomic particle out there that's heavy, and
it's floating around, and it's causing gravity.
But someone said, "Well, you know, maybe there's
complex dark matter," which means there's
a whole dark sector, so there are dark
atoms, and they interact with one another.
And that is a nifty idea, and I love it.
And that was all the rage for a while,
and we looked at it, and it may still
be true, but the simple ideas
have been mostly invalidated
because we've tested it and it doesn't
work. Same thing, there was a talk
about large extra dimensions. The
reason that gravity is so much
weaker than the other forces was, well,
maybe gravity can sneak into more
dimensions than the other forces.
- It leaks into those dimensions.
- That was a cool idea. I mean but that's
the point is you have these lovely, cool,
interesting ideas that constantly die.
And so, you know, I would love for
a new nifty idea to be the idea,
but I don't know how to pick it out
of the hurricane of wrong ideas.
- I mean, that's the real beauty
of science. It really is--
I mean, the theories kind of get
some of the glory sometimes,
but the real beauty emerges from the
experiment and the demonstration that
the theory is correct.
- And there are two directions. You're talking a top-
down. Someone comes up with this big idea that's
testable. But you also have
the other way that science
advances, and it's not with a theory that
is then tested. It's with the, "Huh,
that's weird." For
instance, either in, in the
1930s with Fritz Zwicky
or in the 1970s with Vera
Rubin, she did a simple thing.
She said, "How fast are galaxies
rotating?" 'Cause it's an easy thing to calculate.
You could literally calculate that with
high school physics. And you get an answer,
and then you measure it, and it's wrong.
And so I'll-- That's the, wow, huh, I don't
know what that is. And that led to the
hypothesis of dark matter. Now, dark
matter is not a theory of everything,
but it's a clue. It's a powerful clue.
We should pull, tug at that thread.
Maybe our entire theoretical
edifice unravels, or maybe it
doesn't. Maybe it's just a snag, and we
can fix what we have now. I'm not sure.
So that's another option
is to simply look at many
measurements that are very
precise and find ones where
the outcome and the prediction with established
theory disagree, and that is a clue
- Before we leave the topic, we
gotta talk about string theory.
In your view, is it basically dead?
As I understand one of the
primary flaws of string
theory, outside of the testable
experiments that we're talking about,
is because it relies on these unobserved
extra dimensions, there was a hope that it
uniquely could explain our universe, but
it turns out this, quote, "landscape,"
there's an enormous so-called
landscape of possibilities it leads
to. And so it renders the theory basically
unpredictive, 'cause it can
describe all kinds of universes-
- Sure
- ... and therefore you can just
select, tune it to describe ours.
- I agree to a degree.
But I bring it back to my prior
objection. It is absolutely true that
super string theory at, in
its current manifestation,
aside from the extra dimensions,
which are some level small
potatoes, it allows for an
extremely large number of possible
universes. But if we were able to take
those predictions and somehow connect it
to a physical measurement, then
what we would do is we'd lop off
those alternatives. We'd throw them
away as saying, "Well, you know,
those are like an
equation, you know, X plus
five." I can put in any number I want in
there, it doesn't matter. But if X plus five
equals nine, then I've ruled
out a whole bunch of--
numbers except four. And
so this is a case of
string theory does allow
for many predictions, but
if we could rule them out by connection
to a measurement, then it would no
longer do it. We would modify string
theory, and we would retain the
vibrating string concept, which I really,
really like. I mean, I really like it. But
until we can validate this,
it's, it's, I, I, we can't. So
now you ask, is it dead or not?
In my opinion, it is very difficult to
kill such a theory. I mean, really,
truly kill it, 'cause kill it means
make a prediction and it fails.
But what can happen and what is
happening is people have been working
on it since the '70s.
So we're talking of order 50 years,
people have been working on it,
and it has not solved
the problem. And so I
think what's happening is people
are looking at that and saying,
"Do I wanna spend my life working
in this direction with the
very likely possibility that
30 years from now we'll
be not much farther along than we are
now?" It's a lot like back in the
1940s when people started thinking
about the meaning of quantum mechanics.
And I wanted to do that when
I was a kid in the '70s.
But then when I went to grad school, I
realized that people, very smart people,
people smarter than me, had been working
on that for most of their lives and
made no definitive progress.
And so you have to decide,
as a scientist who wants to answer
questions, do I really wanna take on a
question that is so hard that it will
not be answered in my lifetime? And I
think that's what's happening with a lot of
superstring theories. People are saying, "It's
really neat. It might be right,
but I don't wanna devote my life to
something that I might not see progress
forward in my lifetime."
- What do you think about the alternate
theories? Do you think there's anything
interesting in those?
- You know, many of those theories are espoused
by passionate people. They have fans.
People love them, but they don't
do what science needs to do,
which is make predictions. Now,
loop quantum gravity is a little
different. That one is better
developed, and that one is not a theory
of everything, so we should make that
clear. Loop quantum gravity is not a theory
of everything. It is simply
a theory of quantum gravity,
period. It does not aspire
to include all of the known
forces. It simply tries to take gravity,
which is currently intrinsically, it treats
space as smooth and continuous.
For those of your viewers who are
mathematically inclined, in Einstein's
theory of general relativity,
gravity is infinitely
divisible. There is no
smallest bit, and so essentially
the laws of calculus apply.
However, it is possible that
at a small enough scale,
space is no longer divisible in the same
way that you can, you know, take a cup of
water out of a swimming pool and then a
quarter a cup and so forth. But eventually,
once you've taken out a single molecule
of water, you can no longer take
out a smaller thing. So loop
quantum gravity attempts to
quantize gravity, so that's
what it does. And so this is unlike string
theory, which attempts to bring gravity
in with the other forces. And in fact,
the reason, the fundamental, the
one reason why string theory became so
interesting to the theoretical community is
string theory was not
being developed as a theory of
everything. It was being developed as a
theory of the strong force, and it was
in competition with QCD, which is the
currently accepted theory of the strong force.
And it turned out the two groups,
the string theory groups and
the QCD groups competed
for a while, and string
theory basically failed the race, and
people paid attention to
quantum chromodynamics, QCD.
But then somebody noticed in string
theory that one of the things it
predicted was a zero mass spin-2 particle.
And you can prove that any zero mass
spin-2 particle is the
graviton. And so if you see
a theory that has a zero mass
spin-2 particle, you now
have a candidate for dragging gravity
in, and then, oh my gosh, people got
terribly excited because now
this theory, which was working
in the direction of the other quantum
forces, brought in gravity, and now it was a
candidate theory for everything. But
but that's not what loop quantum gravity is.
Loop quantum gravity is simply trying to
understand the nature of space itself,
which is already a fantastic thing.
And, you know, I talk to Rovelli
every so often. I write about his
theory and I point out some
of the issues with the
theory, but I'm usually about,
like, two months behind as he and
his colleagues are developing and so
forth. 'Cause one of the things is
originally loop quantum gravity predicted
that the speed of light would not be
universal. The speed of light would
depend on the frequency of
the light. So high frequency
would travel at one speed, and low frequency
would travel at a different speed, and it had
to do with the wavelength of
light basically interacting with
the structure of space
if, you know. And so that
was an issue with loop quantum gravity.
And so if you look at gamma ray
bursters, which are, you
know, super explosions of
astronomical events that are a
billion light years away or more,
and they spit out light in all
wavelengths, and if that loop
quantum gravity prediction
were correct, when you saw a,
One of these gamma ray bursters,
you would see the wavelength
of one light appearing on Earth at a
different time than another wavelength
because of the different speeds, and that
wasn't the case. They appear at the same
time. And so I went on to say, "Well, this
pretty much killed loop quantum
gravity," only to get a prickly note
from Mr. or Dr. Rovelli
saying, "You know, we've
disproved that. We've changed the
theory. That's no longer true, and now
that, that prediction, that old prediction
of loop quantum gravity is no longer
valid." And so that observation
of the uniformity of the
speed of light no longer
kills the new loop quantum
gravity. It would've killed the old
one, but it didn't kill the new one.
- By the way, that example
of different speeds of
light based on wavelength,
that's a beautiful thing
that a theory-- That's a testable thing.
- It is.
- Right? So, like, those kinds of things,
and if it in fact did explain a
phenomena of that sort, that's a
good sign for the theory, right?
If it correctly predicted.
- There was another brilliant
observation recently. Love it.
The observation of gravity waves.
And it was from two neutron stars
orbiting and coalescing. And so they made
gravitational waves, fantastic, but
they also, because they were not
black holes, they were neutron
stars, they hit and exploded, gave
off a tremendous bright flash of light.
And so astronomers saw the flash.
Gravitational wave astronomers saw
the ripples of space-time. It was 140
million light years away, which
means light would've traveled 140
million years to get here, and
the two incidents, light and
gravity, both arrived within
1.7 seconds of one another.
And that tells you that gravity
travels at the speed of light.
That was a brilliant, fantastic
measurement. Now, we thought
gravity traveled at the speed of light, but
now we have a measurement, we proved it, and
damn it, I am impressed.
- Our universe is so fascinating. Speaking
of which, since we brought up antimatter,
we'll have to talk about it. You've
talked about it in several of your
lectures from different
angles, including the dark
energy crisis and including empty
space and vacuum and so on.
So let's look at the empty space angle. So
you know, it turns out that
empty space is not empty.
- It's true. Which is kind of bizarre.
- Can you speak about what do we know
about what makes up empty space?
- That's a hard question because we don't
know what space is. But let's start out—
... let's just start out with
something simple. We'll assume that
space is not quantized, okay?
Now, it probably is, I don't know, but, you
know, we gotta start with somewhere. So
let's start out with sort of the space
of calculus, the space that you can
divide forever. The modern version of
quantum mechanics is called quantum
field theory, and it postulates
that, A, space exists. Then
it postulates that within space there
exist fields for every known subatomic
particle. So there is a photon field,
there's an electron field, there's an
up quark field, there's a down quark
field. There's all the fields.
And those fields can vibrate,
and when they vibrate, those
are the subatomic particles.
So an electron field vibrating in a
characteristic way is an electron.
Now, it's also possible
for the electron field to
vibrate not in the characteristic
way, but in a way that's
still vibrating, but it's not
an exact electron. So this
is what we call virtual particles.
Now, virtual particles,
there are lots of ways to talk about
them, and the way I'm talking about now
is the most correct and the most
sophisticated way that we can talk
about them. I will talk about
them briefly in a simpler way
to help. But right now, that's
the important thing, is that
there are these fields. Specific
vibrations are the known
particles. Vibrations that
are a little different are,
these virtual particles. They're
particles that don't truly
exist. And so that is what we think
space is. There is all of these these,
these fields. They're all
vibrating a little. If you
insert the right amount of energy,
you can get it to vibrate in the
characteristic way and make that
subatomic particle. But even when
you don't—there is the particles, I
mean the fields are there and they are vibrating.
So those vibrating vibrations are what we
called virtual particles. Now, your
viewers may have heard of virtual
particles in other ways, in which
case it says that space is just
empty, and what happens is matter
and antimatter particles briefly
appear for a very short
period of time before they
coalesce back again and disappear and,
re-emerge back into the field. And so that--
these are both correct. So what happens
is, is that's what quantum field theory
says, is it says that these ripples are
appearing or these particles are appearing and
disappearing. And so
that just sounds nuts.
You look at empty space, you're not
seeing anything happening. But they're
happening fast enough that they
can't be seen, but they do have
consequences. And there are two
experimental measurements that
I can think of that validate that this
thing that sounds crazy is really happening,
and one is called the Casimir effect.
So in the Casimir effect,
you take two metal plates,
the parallel plates, and you put them
near one another, very, very close.
Now, if this is the case, if these virtual
particles exist, then in between
the plates, these particles
appearing and disappearing, and
outside the plates, the particles are
appearing and disappearing. However, because
these plates are close to one another,
this puts a constraint on the
wavelength of the particles that can
occur between the two plates
because they, the particles
cannot extend outside the plates.
So the short wavelength
particles can exist inside the—
between the plates, but
the longer ones cannot.
However, outside the plates,
there is no constraint, so short
wavelength and long wavelength
particles can exist
there. And the net effect is
there are more virtual particles
outside and less particles
inside, and therefore you have a
net pressure which would then push
those two plates together. That
is a prediction we've been talking
about, and guess what? It happens.
Those plates push together. So
that is a validation for the
existence of these particles in
empty space. Now, there is another
measurement, and this changes the magnetic
properties of particles like the
electron, the muon and, and so
forth. And so this was discovered in
1948. So if you take old school standard
quantum mechanics you know the
spin of an electron, you know
its charge, you can calculate its
magnetic moment, and it comes out to
a number. If you do the measurement,
what you find is the measurement
disagrees with the quantum mechanics,
the nineteen thirties quantum mechanical
prediction by point one percent, and that
was measured in nineteen forty-eight.
And people went, "Huh". So this happened
at Shelter Island Conference in New
York. And on the way home,
someone who saw the,
this measurement thought
about it, and they
invented what we now call quantum
electrodynamics. So old quantum
mechanics quantizes matter.
The second quantization
quantizes both matter
and the fields, in this
case, quantized the electric fields.
And so in this quantized field,
it predicts that surrounding
a bare, say, electron,
which is spinning and has
a, has a charge, there is
this, this bath of
particles, virtual particles
appearing and disappearing all
around it. And the ensemble of
all of those particles
appearing and disappearing will
alter the magnetic properties
that you can measure for the
subatomic particle, and it
changes it by point one
percent. And we have measured this,
and we have not measured this
imprecisely. We have measured
the magnetic properties
of both the electron and the muon to twelve,
count them, twelve significant figures.
And the theory and the
data agree number for
number for ten places. And
then once you get out to
the very end where both
the theory and the data
have some imprecision, they then
disagree. And so maybe there's some
interesting stuff going on there. But
ten figures, it's just staggering.
- So virtual particles refer to matter and
antimatter particles coming to life.
- Correct.
- Can we just talk about the antimatter
part of that? So starting with Paul
Dirac, one of the most legendary examples
of math leading to physics. So the math
suggesting that something
like antimatter should exist,
and Paul Dirac taking
it seriously and then
eventually showing that it does exist. So
what evidence do we have for antimatter?
- So antimatter was predicted in
nineteen twenty-eight. Paul Dirac was
trying to merge quantum mechanics
and relativity because the
original Schrödinger equation did
not, was not relativistic. And in
doing so, he basically, the
equations were complex, but
in the end it came down to something
like equation squared equals
one. You take the square root of both
sides, you get equation equals plus
one or minus one. Plus one was the
electron, minus one was something.
He didn't know what it was. There was
some conversation for a while, thought
maybe it might be the proton, but that
didn't seem to work out. And so he insisted
that his equations were right and
that there was an antimatter,
he didn't call it an antimatter, but a
positively charged sibling of the electron,
what we now call the positron, the
antimatter electron. So it was predicted.
It was discovered in
nineteen thirty-two by Carl
Anderson and his student Seth
Neddermeyer. They saw an antimatter
electron. And that was pretty cool. So
that right there, they knew it was
real. Antimatter was predicted, it was
observed, that's that. In nineteen
fifty- six, the antimatter
proton was created, and that required
a large particle accelerator,
high enough energy to make
it, and that was done at
Berkeley. And a year later,
the antimatter neutron was
discovered. So at this point,
and now jumping ahead to now,
we can make, using energy by
smashing particles together, we
can make antimatter protons,
we can make antimatter electrons.
We have gone so far to
make antimatter helium nuclei. So we
have made two antiprotons and two
antineutrons, combined them together
to make an antimatter helium
nuclei. This has been done,
been observed, no question.
At CERN, they have gone so far as to make
antimatter hydrogen. They take
a beam off one of their lower
energy accelerators. They
make antimatter protons.
They collect them, they slow them down,
they cool them to almost absolute
zero. They take Sodium-22, which makes
antimatter electrons. They slow them
down, they bring them together, they
coalesce them, and they make literal
antimatter hydrogen
atoms with an antimatter
proton surrounded by an
antimatter electron. And
they have done incredible
measurements. They have
agitated the atoms and caused it to
emit light. They have looked at the
light that comes out of antimatter
atoms. And the question is,
is does the light coming out of
antimatter hydrogen atoms have
exactly the same spectral characteristics
as ordinary hydrogen, which
we predict that it does?
And the answer is it does. So
the tests have been staggering.
We now know a great deal about
antimatter hydrogen. Recently,
recently like 2023, I believe it
was, one of the experiments called
ALPHA at CERN made antimatter hydrogen,
put it in a bottle and released
it and watched which way it would go.
Did it fall up or did it
fall down? Because while
it kind of makes sense maybe
to think that maybe antimatter
falls up in the same way that we have
Coulomb's law, you've got electric
charges, and they might
attract or repel. However,
there was lots of ample
theoretical reasons to
believe that antimatter also
would fall down. So they did this
fantastic measurement,
and they first they put in hydrogen,
and they calculated that some-- if they
did this, something like eighty
percent of the hydrogen atoms would
fall through the bottom of the
bottle, and twenty percent would go
through the top just because
gravity is very weak
and the atoms will escape wherever
they do, but there will be a bias
pulling hydrogen atoms down. So
they did exactly the same thing,
and what did they find?
They find that antimatter
falls down. Now, they do not have
a good enough measurement at
this time to say that the gravity that
antimatter experiences is one hundred percent
that of matter. What they have measured
is that antimatter fell
down with a seventy-five
percent the strength of regular matter,
but there were big uncertainties.
There was plus or minus .13
three due to the experiment, which was
good but imperfect, and plus or minus .16
due to their theoretical
model. So it's like point
seven five plus or minus
something like point two nine.
And that means there's a good chance
it's between point five and one-
... which means it's consistent with one.
So they are improving their measurements.
- Well, if I can, I would love to
take a bit of a tangent on that
topic 'cause I went down a rabbit
hole watching some of your videos on
antimatter. And I mean,
Fermilab was the hub
for the production of
antimatter for quite a while.
- It was.
- I saw that NASA said that
the global estimate for the
current rate of production of
antimatter is one nanogram per year.
Can you speak to how hard was
it to make antimatter? And
also, you did mention in a video
that, you know, if matter and
antimatter meet, they
produce a lot of energy.
I think twenty grams of antimatter is
equivalent to a one-megaton nuclear warhead
in terms of explosive energy. Yeah, so
all of those questions together. So
how hard is it to produce antimatter?
- It's freaking hard. Okay.
All right. So here's the
deal. So at the time until two
thousand and eleven, Fermilab
was the most powerful antiproton
production facility on the planet.
Every two point three seconds,
we would smash ten to the
thirteen protons into a target,
and we would get out ten
to the eighth antiprotons.
So basically, in order to
get a single antiproton, we
needed to smash a hundred
thousand protons into material.
So every two point three
seconds, we would get of order
ten to the eighth antiprotons.
And what we would
do is we would collect them over
the course of twelve hours or
so, and we would get, in the end,
we would have to collect them and
cool them down and so forth, of
order ten to the twelfth antiprotons
every twelve to twenty-four
hours. So ten to the
twelfth sounds like a lot. It
really does. That is a trillion.
But you need to remember that
a gram of antimatter is ten to
the twenty-three antiprotons.
So that means over
the course of a day, we were able to
create something like one hundred
billionth of a gram. And so
if we did that for a year,
then that would be about a nanogram. So
about a nanogram a year, give or take.
That's a reasonable estimate. So a
nanogram, one billionth of a
gram, so that means at that
rate, with that facility, it would
take a billion years running
with very little downtime
to make a single gram of
antimatter. If you combine
one gram of antimatter
and one gram of matter together, the
energy release is equivalent
to the combined Hiroshima and
Nagasaki explosions. So that tells
you if you wanted a megaton,
you need about 25 times
more. So you would have to run
for 25 billion years to get a
megaton of explosive power.
- Let me lay it all out, because I think
it's pretty interesting actually. This is
a NASA estimate of how much it costs to
produce antimatter. So looking at all
the costs of the accelerator, all,
everything combined together,
to do enough for a one-megaton
antimatter bomb, if such
a thing would be even possible, on the
order of 25 grams, like we mentioned-
... will cost about, based
on the NASA estimate,
uh, $1.5 quadrillion.
By the way NASA wasn't
talking about a bomb. It's just me
adding- NASA was talking about the
estimate, the cost of 62 to 63 trillion
dollars per gram of antihydrogen,
actually is what they're
referring to. So compared--
I was looking at estimates, the current
best estimate is how much it takes
to produce a one-megaton nuclear warhead.
Everything combined is about 10 to 50
million dollars in the United States.
So you're talking about difference in
terms of a weapon with equal power,
50 million dollars versus $1.5
quadrillion. To me, what's interesting,
weapons is just one
indication of this. One other
possibility, and NASA also
writes about this, is the use of
antimatter in propulsion systems.
Uh, just like you can use nuclear
fission and maybe even nuclear
fusion down the line.
In propulsion systems,
I saw that one gram can help
get us to Alpha Centauri star
system if we can get to 0.2 times
the speed of light in 20 years.
Meaning it would take us 20
years to get to Alpha Centauri.
Is any of this a possible future,
the use of antimatter for
generation of energy? Because we
should mention that it's extremely
compact. It has the obvious
downsides that it's extremely
costly to produce. We don't know
how to do that kind of scale.
The upside is it's compact.
- It's very powerful. So the
short answer is it is not a
physics problem, it's an engineering
problem. So I have people for that.
- Well, yeah.
- But no, no. The truth is that antimatter,
if you are able to assemble
it and store it, sure,
it would be able to take that
antimatter, heat up matter,
and shoot it out the back
of a rocket, and it would,
you know, do what rockets do, and it would
make us go quick, and that would be fine.
- And we should mention the thing that you
just mentioned is correct. One of the hugest
challenges is the containment-
- Oh, 100%, yeah
- ... because antimatter, when it comes in
contact with matter- ... Is a problem.
- Right. So if you were
unable to contain your trip
to Alpha Centauri for even a millionth of
a second, boom, that would not be good.
It reminds me of the
the Star Trek where Scotty's saying, "Captain,
you know, the antimatter pods are about--
look, we're losing containment. It's gonna
blow." And that's exactly what would happen.
So the short answer is yes, antimatter as,
in principle, we could make and use as a,
a source of energy. But there are probably
far less expensive sources of energy.
you know, it depends on what you need
to do. The Voyager probes are still
chugging along with plutonium. Now, they're
running out of energy at this point, but we could,
you know, presumably do a
somewhat better job if we needed
to. So I like the idea
of antimatter, you know,
but the reality is the danger,
not the obvious danger of
weapons, but the danger of if
you wanted to be in a ship run
by antimatter, if it ever got loose,
well, you would never know it.
That would be that.
- The reason I find this kind of inspiring
is antimatter is in the space of physics
that has a lot of mysteries.
There's a lot of exploration to be
done. And so this kind
of connection to energy
means that if we have a bunch
of breakthroughs on the
antimatter side, that
might lead to a better
propulsion system, better
energy generation systems.
- In principle.
- There's some combination of engineering here,
but there's some combination of understanding
the fundamental physics.
- I mean, we know how to do this.
You know, we know you take
energy, you make antimatter.
You have to contain it. You have to store
it. You have to do all the hard things.
But I, I would be shocked if there
was some, like, new addition to the-
... theory that made
antimatter production easier.
- Interesting. So we know how to
produce antimatter with accelerators.
You're saying there's not breakthroughs in
physics that could lead to different
mechanisms for the generation of antimatter.
- You have to concentrate energy. That's
it. If there's another way to concentrate
energy, that would work too.
- And our best knowledge of how to
concentrate energy is the accelerator.
- And remember, we're talking
concentrating it into volumes
the size of a proton. I mean, if you
concentrate it to the size of your thumb,
well, then, you know, it's really
the density that matters, the local
density. And so when you smash two
protons together, all of that's
occurring in a tiny, tiny volume, so it's
the local density of energy that matters.
If you had a lot of energy
in a thimble or something-
... It's probably not
dense enough. You know-
... it really has to be in close proximity
for that to happen, and then when
it does, it's okay. So
if there's another way, we know
how to do it, to make that density
thing with accelerators. If
someone has a bright idea on
how to make highly dense energy,
then yeah making antimatter is a
piece of cake. But that's the crux-
... concentrated energy.
- Yeah, and how to do so in a cost-efficient
manner, not trillions of dollars.
- Well, yeah.
- So one of the big mysteries with
antimatter is the bigger why.
Where is the antimatter that
should kind of be there
if the whole idea is that
anytime you generate matter, you
generate the same amount of antimatter, and
yet when we look out into the observable
universe, it seems like there's not
antimatter for the most part there.
- Correct.
- So what do we understand about this mystery?
What are the possible explanations as
to why?
- So there's this thing called
baryogenesis and, as you say, so
reiterating a little bit what
you just said these are both
Einstein things. Einstein says that when you
take energy, you make matter and antimatter in
equal quantities, and Einstein says after
the Big Bang, there was a lot of energy
in the universe, which should
have made matter and antimatter.
We only see matter. Where'd the antimatter
go? And the answer is, we don't know.
However, there are some ideas, and
there's a lot of thinking on it, and
in fact, for me, it's doing
an experiment right now with
neutrinos, trying to better
understand what it was that made
the matter and antimatter not be the
same. Now, we do have a measurement
of how much different it should be,
and it's kind of neat. We can do this
by counting the number of protons in the
universe, just looking at galaxies
and so forth, and then we can
look at the cosmic microwave background,
which is sort of the aftermath of the Big
Bang, and we can count the number
of photons from the cosmic
microwave background. And with a
little bit of math, what we can do
is we can then say that somehow in the
early universe, something made a very,
very tiny asymmetry, so that for
every billion, billion with a B,
antimatter particles that existed
in the universe, there were
a billion and one matter particles.
The billions canceled, annihilated,
destroyed each other, and that
extra one that's left over is us.
And so what physics mechanism
made that ever so slight
asymmetry is not understood.
There are some thoughts.
One thought is that, well, it's
just how it was. When the universe was
formed, there was an asymmetry. It was
not made by matter and antimatter.
Another possibility is there are
various numbers of theories all
under the word baryogenesis,
baryo coming from word baryon,
which basically means protons,
and genesis meaning the creation
of, and we'd say that simply
because the protons are the
heaviest particles. And so
baryogenesis is just
the creation of matter.
And there are just a number of
theories in quantum mechanics that say
that matter and antimatter can,
can oscillate back and forth
into one another, and there
is a slight, slight asymmetry in how that
happens. And we know that this is true to
a degree. We've measured it in the 1960s
with a different form of matter. I
mean you know, not protons, but a,
a type of ephemeral matter that only
exists in particle accelerators. And so
we know that there is a slight difference
between matter and antimatter,
but it's not enough. It doesn't explain
that. We're not sure. So at Fermilab,
we have this idea which kind of
turns things on its head, and it's
not baryogenesis, it's leptogenesis.
So leptons are the electrons.
And because Fermilab is currently the
world's most powerful neutrino accelerator,
and neutrinos are leptons, there
is this idea. Now, leptogenesis is
incredibly complicated, but the idea is
that it is possible. We know
that neutrinos actually
change their identity. There are three
different types of neutrinos like
I don't know, cats and jaguars and
tigers, and if you have a beam of just
cats, if you go along a little while,
you find there's cats and jaguars and
then tigers, and then they'll be
back to all cats again. And so this
oscillation thing is called neutrino
oscillation. We've known it's been true since
1998, and what we are studying
is we're going to make
a beam of neutrinos and
another beam of antimatter
neutrinos, and we're going to study
the oscillation behavior of the two of
them. And it is possible,
it is unlikely, but it is
possible that the two of them will
oscillate at slightly different rates.
And if the neutrinos oscillate
at slightly different rates,
then that, along with several
other highly improbable
things, can tie together and might explain
why there is more matter in the universe.
So if I was gonna bet the farm,
I'll bet that they oscillate at the
same rate, but I don't know, and you don't
know till you do the measurements, so that's
what we're doing. There are some other
experiments trying to measure it
right now, so there's a big race
between the Fermilab group and
another group in Japan to see who gets
there first and, and make this measurement,
and we will find out. If it turns out,
though, that there is a difference in
this oscillation rate between matter
and antimatter, it will be a huge
clue in this very, very difficult puzzle.
I wish I could tell you I knew
what the answer is, but literally
nobody knows. I mean, and that's the
thing of being a research scientist like
me is if you're not confused-
... you're not doing your job.
- So there is this desperate or
not desperate, exciting search
for this tiny asymmetry.
- Yes.
- It's so, so crazy to think that
everything we see around us
is a result of this tiny asymmetry,
that there was this gigantic
annihilation of matter and
antimatter in the early-
- Yes
- ... universe, and this is just
some little accident. But yeah.
- Yeah, that's crazy.
- It's a happy accident.
- That is—I mean, it's totally crazy.
- This is one of the areas of physics
where there's a lot of mystery.
Okay. So can we pull at that thread a
little further? Let's talk about
our intuition of what is dark
energy as it connects to empty space and
everything we've been talking about.
What's the cleanest
definition of dark energy?
- So dark energy is either energy
of space or energy in space.
The most common statement
is the energy of space,
and it is essentially a
repulsive form of gravity.
And we believe this is real,
and the reason we believe
this is real is from observation.
This is one of those things where
we talked about a while ago where I said
that, you know, you can think about things
up this theoretical stuff and try to
come up with a measurement, or you
can make measurements and
see where they disagree with
predictions and lead that in
a direction. So back in the
late 1990s, some astronomers were
looking at the expansion rate of the
universe. So the Big Bang occurred,
the universe is expanding,
the universe is full of matter,
matter attracts, so the
gravity due to the matter of the
universe should slow the expansion of
the universe. And the only
question was how much?
There were three possibilities. The
possibilities were there was so much
gravitational force that the
expansion of the universe
would slow, stop, and be pulled
back together in a big crunch.
Number two was that the
universe would continue
expanding, slowing down,
but never really stopping.
And then the third possibility was
the exact critical case, where
expansion would slow forever and
approach zero only at infinity,
never quite stopping or reversing. So
those were the possibilities, door number
one, two, or three. So they did
the measurement, and what did they
found? It was door number
four. The universe was not
only expanding, but the expansion was speeding
up, and the only way that could happen,
given that gravity slows it down,
is there was a repulsive force, and
the name we give to that
repulsive force is dark energy.
This is something that Einstein postulated
early on in his development of,
of general relativity, but then because
at the time, he knew that his theory
predicted that the universe would
collapse but he believed the
universe was eternal and not
unchanging, and so he needed
something to counterbalance the
that collapse, and so he invented
dark energy. He didn't call it that.
Called it the cosmological
constant. But then a few years
later, Edwin Hubble discovered that
the universe was indeed expanding,
and so since the universe was no
longer static, Einstein said,
"No need for cosmological
constant," took it back out.
Thought it was a dumb idea that he
put it in, and was embarrassed.
However, in 1998 it became clear that
his original idea that there should
be some sort of repulsive form of gravity
was real, and it's put back in the theory.
And so that's what it is. We are pretty
confident at this point that the expansion
of the universe is speeding
up, and the thing driving
it is dark energy. Now, what is dark
energy? I don't know. As I said,
the most common thought is that
it is the energy of space itself,
but it is at least conceivable that there
is a field in space where space exists-
... and that field is pushing space apart.
That's another conceivability
that I'm not sure that we
have the instrumentation to distinguish,
but that's not what normally people
think. People think it is
literally a property of space.
- But there is the
what, what you call the worst
prediction in physics, which is a nice-
- Oh, yeah. That's another one
- ... a nice little insight about
the complicated nature of
dark energy. So the observations,
as you describe, say that empty space
has a tiny energy density that, to
accelerates expansion of the universe.
But quantum field theory's prediction
for what vacuum energy should be when
coupled with gravity is much larger.
Uh, so this is what makes for the
quote, you have a video on this worst
prediction in physics.
- Yes.
- Can you, can you explain this crisis?
- Well, the-- there's a measurement, and
you can measure how fast the universe is
expanding, and from that you get
a measurement of dark energy.
However, if you then say, well,
suppose the dark energy is due to
fields in space. So that's quantum
field theory. Hey, I know a lot
about quantum field theory. And so we can
take the quantum field theory, and we can
calculate what the density of energy is
due to quantum field theory. And basically
what you do is you take within a volume
the all of the wavelengths, the
longer wavelengths, the shorter
wavelengths, the shorter wave-- shorter
and shorter, and you can add them all
up. And each wavelength adds a certain
amount of energy, and if you add that all
up, then you get a number, and that
number is the rather embarrassing
10 to the 120 power times, that's
a one with 120 zeros after
it, bigger than the
measurement of dark energy.
So you go, "Yuck, that is not fun at all."
And that is because the equation comes to
the highest energy or
the smallest wavelength
particle that you can imagine
to the fourth power, since
anything to the fourth
power is a big deal. So
that's where you get that awful
number. Now, if it turns out
that there is some new physics
that's just about at the energy
scale we can measure using our biggest
particle accelerators, remember I told
you that that was a factor,
the maximum energy scale,
Planck scale, is 10 to
the 15 times bigger than
what we can measure now.
So let's say that we don't
have to calculate up to the Planck
scale because something happens,
something changes at the
energy that we know right
now. Well, then that means we don't
have to integrate to Planck scale, we
integrate to 10 to the 15th less
of the Planck scale, and this
thing is to the fourth power, so 10 to the
15th to the fourth power is 60. So now,
even if we say, you know, Don, he's
brilliant, he's gonna find something at
the LHC tomorrow that's gonna solve all
this problem, now we've solved it, it's
much better. It's only different
by 10 to the 60th power,
which is still pretty bleeding
big. So the short answer
is there is very clearly
something going on, something
wrong, very badly wrong in
the quantum field theory.
You know, we have to have, maybe there's
another field that balances out the
energy, that cancels it
down. And even that,
you know, that's not so
outrageous. You know, you could
imagine that there's another, you know,
like we have matter and antimatter, they
balance pretty well. Okay, maybe there's
something going on, you could cancel that
out, that'd be perfect. But
canceling something to zero
is easy 'cause, you know, plus one and
minus one, zero. Plus two, minus two, zero.
But we still have dark energy. Dark energy
is a little bit, so if it cancels, it
doesn't cancel exactly 'cause
it left over that little bit of
dark energy. So that is its own curiosity.
Perfect cancellation, pretty easy.
Theorists do that, you know, eight
times before breakfast. Imperfect
cancellation, much harder.
- Just to elaborate that a little bit,
what do you think solving, in quotes,
solving dark energy would look like?
- Well, what you would do is you would
hypothesize that there existed some other
field that had the reverse effect
of existing quantum fields.
- But not to zero.
- But not to zero. So if you had
it to go to zero, you know
sure, maybe there's a field
that, that exists at really high
energies that we haven't seen
yet. I don't know, but it
canceled things out, and we're cool.
- How would we then demonstrate
the existence of that field?
- Uh, well, that would depend
on the, the prediction.
- How do you even come up with a new field?
- Like all theorists do. Well, let's add
something to my equation and see what happens.
I mean, and that's okay. I mean, I—
... I'm being glib about that, but that
is precisely what you do. You say,
what change? We, we have this thing
that works quite beautifully except
it fails here. What is the addition
that we need to make that changes
very little in the realm that we
measured and yet fixes this hard thing?
And so you literally just go, da,
da, da, okay, what do I need?
Plus six or something. And as
long as it makes no changes where
it would hurt our measurements and
fixes the big thing, then that is
at least a candidate theory. Now,
that doesn't mean it's right, but
it at least gives you an understanding of
what the right answer should look like.
And so that's the first step, is what
should the real answer look like or what
is a possible real answer?
And then once you kind of
know that, then other people can look
and say, "Well, let me think about a
theory that kind of has
the required properties
to do what we need it to do." So it's
a multi-step process, but the first
step is how do we tame
this problem without
coming up with really terrible
predictions that we've already ruled out?
And so that's what you do. And,
you know, that is literally a
sensible, viable, theoretical thing,
you know, 'cause you have to explore
cool ideas.
- I mean, one of the reasons dark energy is
super interesting is it kind of gives us
a mechanism by which we can talk about
the deep future of the universe. I
mean, it's making-- We have observations
about the expansion of the universe,
but it's also giving us the
mechanism of that, right?
- Sure.
- So we can talk about,
Any weirdness, any good model we
have that, that captures some of the
weirdness of dark energy
might give us insights about
how this thing ends, how the universe-
- Sure, sure
- ... about the deep future
of the universe, right?
- Absolutely. As it stands right now,
if dark energy is real, and who
knows, you know, if it's real
exactly as we've measured it,
then as the universe
gets bigger and bigger,
dark energy becomes a bigger
and bigger component of the-
... energy balance of the universe,
and it takes over, and it drives the
continued accelerated
expansion of the universe.
And if dark energy gets lower, you
know, for some reason that we don't
understand, maybe it changes over time,
gets smaller. That could change things.
If it gets bigger, it could change things-
- That is one of the big open questions,
whether it's constant over time or not
- ... Right. And there has been a recent measurement
that suggests that dark energy is getting
smaller. However, that is
a new measurement, not
confirmed, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah. Nobody should believe it,
but it's a hint that maybe it's
changing, which is kind of cool
in itself because the
current bias until recently
is that dark energy is
constant. Now, I wanna be
super careful because
it's misleading. People
say dark energy is constant.
Dark energy is a density.
Now, that-- think about that. You have a
certain density, let's start with that.
Then the universe expands. So energy is
volume times density. If the universe
gets bigger and the density is constant,
that means dark energy is increasing.
It's not just increasing as
a fraction and overwhelming
ordinary matter, but ordinary
matter, as the universe
expands, its density decreases
because it's constant and the
volume gets bigger, the density
drops. Dark energy, until
recently, is thought to
be constant density.
- So that's what's implied when you say constant. You
say constant density, which means it's actually
increasing because space is
increasing. The size of space-
- Right
- ... is increasing. Interesting.
- And so that's a weirdness,
and that then ties
into the nature of space.
Why does that tie into the
nature of space? Well, because
if dark energy is a field
in space, if you increase the volume, you
would think the energy density would drop.
But if space is increasing and space
is quantized, and I don't know
if it is, then maybe what's
happening is space isn't
stretching, but like little
space particles are appearing
as the space, you know, there's like
bubbles of space appearing, and each
bubble contains a certain amount
of dark energy. And so therefore,
that would give you a sense that
dark energy is a property of
space rather than a field in space. But
that's all very hand-wavy guess-worky
stuff.
- So if you had to bet all your
money, is dark energy like a real
physical, what does that even mean, thing
that exists versus is this just an,
a renaming of the cosmological constant?
- Unfortunately, I think it's
both. I mean, well, I mean—
it is, it's describing a
reality, but it's also
maybe telling us something about space.
- Literally a property of space.
- Yeah. It's, I mean, that's kind of what
it looks like. Given that it seems to
be constant density, that seems to
me-- Now, this is not something
anybody should believe. Please,
nobody believe this. But
it seems to me that this is
leaning towards the idea
that, A, it's a property of space, B,
space is quantized, C, as space is
expanding, little quanta of
space are appearing, and D,
each one of those quanta has a certain amount
of energy associated with it, and that
would kind of explain
the constant density. Now, please, that's
not— Anybody should— Nobody accepts that.
This is just nonsense.
- But a lot of the stuff that you
just said is experimentally,
probably experimentally testable.
You can probably construct-
- Well
- ... experimentally the bubbles of
- Well, finding out the bubbles of space,
but those quanta conceivably are
Planck size bubbles.
- Yeah, the quanta.
- Well, they'd be quanta of space. I mean,
the idea is, you know, you look at a sand
dune and it looks smooth and continuous,
but you can see individual grains of
sand, right? And so what this is
saying is as this dune expands,
new grains of sand are appearing, and
each one of them is a quantum of space.
- So what kind of experiments can
we do in the coming decades
or centuries to understand
dark energy better?
- I mean, people have been talking about
quantum entanglement of gravity.
In standard quantum mechanics, a particle
can be in two places at the same
time. All right? So now
you have two particles. So
this particle can be in two places at the same time.
This particle can be in two places at the same time,
and you put them near one another. Well, if
they're close to each other, there's a certain
gravitational force. If they're far apart,
there are certain... And if they, one
is close and one is far, you have
another one. You can calculate
the effects of gravity having to
do with quantum entangled
particles being in two places. And
people are talking about
doing this and trying to
see if in doing such a
measurement, they might
be able to definitively determine
whether gravity is a quantum phenomenon
or a continuous phenomenon.
And that is potentially a
measurement that could be done
soon-ish because the technologies of
inherent in all of this recent
work on quantum mechanics
is allowing people to be able to make
instrumentation that might be precise
enough to do this measurement.
Now, this will not tell us what quantum gravity
is. It will not tell us anything, but it
will tell us that gravity is quantized.
And just knowing that, well,
for one thing, it shuts out a
whole realm of continuous
gravity, and the theoretical
community will then turn its attention,
forget this stuff, and, and think
over here. Now, that doesn't tell you
that space is quantized, but it tells you
that gravity is quantized if it bears out.
So if gravity is quantized, then people
will start thinking more about space
being quantized.
- I have to ask 'cause you mentioned dark
matter is perhaps even more mysterious
than dark energy.
- Okay.
- Can you,
can you build up the intuition why it's
more mysterious? What is dark matter?
- Oh gosh, what is dark matter? A, I don't
know. B, it's terribly fascinating.
All right? So first thing, and the
most important thing 'cause I'm an
experimentalist, by God,
the first thing is why do we believe
there's dark matter? And the reason is that
astronomical measurements do
not agree with predictions by
Newtonian or relativity
theory. Galaxies spin too
fast, clusters of galaxies
move too quickly,
and the distortion of
very distant galaxies due
to the gravitational
field of nearer galaxies
disagrees with the prediction
from what we see from the
observed matter. So there are three very
distinct reasons why we
are predicting that,
something is wrong in our understanding of
either the laws of physics or the matter
budget of the universe. The
easiest one to talk about is the
spinning galaxies. Now, this is--
what I'm saying is not unique to
spinning galaxies, just easiest to talk
about. So galaxies are observed to spin more
quickly than they should if we add up the
gravity we see. By all rights, galaxies
spinning that fast should blow themselves
apart, and they don't. So what can be
the answer? Well, you have the force
required for a star to orbit to
move in a circle, and you have the
force due to gravity, and they're
connected by an equal sign,
and the prediction is wrong. So either
the force due to gravity is wrong,
the force needed to move in a circle is
wrong, or the equal sign is wrong. I mean,
this is really simple. One
of those things is wrong.
So one possibility is
simply that Newton's law of
gravity, mass times the mass over R squared
times a constant, that's just wrong.
Another possibility is Newton's
F equals ma that we are taught
in introductory physics is wrong.
Both of those are eminently
possible. Over here, maybe
we don't understand gravity,
or maybe there's more
mass than we can see.
So these, you know, I mean, it's nice that you
can look at this really simply and come up
with a list, you know, a cookbook
of things we can test. And
and so we've done that. We've
gone and said, "What are the
possibilities?" Well, the most
obvious possibility is that there is
more mass than we can see.
There's black holes, there's,
hydrogen gas that we can't see,
whatever. There's something out there.
So that was the first thing. So you go and you
look, and there's no hydrogen gas because we
can see that with radio
waves. That's not it.
In the '90s, we went looking for black
holes, rogue planets, things like
that. Those exist, but not enough of them.
That's not it. And so now we're left
with there's some sort of matter that we
can't see, or we don't understand
gravity, or we don't understand
inertia. Now, I personally, if you asked
me this, oh, I don't know, 25 years ago, I
would've said the most likely answer is that
we don't understand inertia or gravity.
You know, I-- if 20 years ago, 25 years
ago, that's what I would've said, no
problem. However, there have been
a couple of observations that
that have caused me to change my
thinking, and I think that dark matter is
more likely. One of them is called
the Bullet Cluster. So the Bullet
Cluster, there are two
large clusters of galaxies.
In these large clusters of
galaxies, well, any galaxy
consists of a couple of
components. There are the
galaxies themselves, there is the
hydrogen gas that surrounds the
galaxies, and maybe there is dark matter.
And if dark matter is real
or dark matter is not real,
you will get different answers if those
two galaxies pass through one another.
The galaxies themselves should pass through one
another basically not interacting, but the big thing
is the gas clouds. So if
there's big clouds of gas, as
the galaxies pass through one another, the clouds
should interact, and the gas clouds should
stop in the middle and be really,
really hot. So then you would see, if
there were no dark matter,
you would see a cluster of
galaxies, cluster of galaxies,
a big gas cloud in the middle,
and because the big gas
cloud in the middle
is much more massive than the
galaxies themselves, you would
expect to see distortions that we call
dark matter distortions in the middle.
If, however, dark matter is real, the
galaxies pass through one another, the
cloud stops, dark matter doesn't interact
with the cloud, so it passes through.
In that case, you would expect to see
the distortions where the galaxies are.
And that's what we see. So
that is strong evidence in my
mind. The Bullet Cluster is strong
evidence that dark matter is a real thing.
And there is another example which is much
more recent, dark Bullet Cluster was a while
ago, called the Dragonfly
galaxies. There's Dragonfly 2 and
Dragonfly 4. These are galaxies that
rotate exactly according to Newton's laws.
And so the fact that they rotate
exactly according to Newton's laws
says that whatever's causing
galaxies to rotate too fast
is not a property of matter. But if you had
a galaxy where there was no dark matter,
for whatever reason it got stripped off
or something, this is one of those lovely
ironies that the existence of a
galaxy with no dark matter is
very strong evidence that dark matter is
real because you can take the dark matter
out. So the DF2 and DF4 also suggests
to me that dark matter is real. So now,
while it remains possible that we need to
modify the laws of inertia or we need to
modify the laws of gravity, those are possible
still. In my opinion, and
now this is Don's opinion,
but it's probably the opinion of
most of the scientific community,
dark matter is likely a real thing.
Now, that's great. I've taken you all the
way to dark matter. So now you're gonna ask
me, you're gonna say, "Don, what is dark
matter?" I'm gonna go, "I don't know."
But I know what it isn't. Okay? I know
that it is not black holes. I know that it
is not rogue planets. I know that
we've done the measurements. We've
looked across nearly every mass range
for compact objects and ruled them
out. So if dark matter is real,
it can't be made of those.
So then you're left with the idea that dark matter
is a particle, and that's what we've thought
The name for the dark matter particle
that we've called for a long time is a
WIMP, for a weakly interacting massive
particle, and we have spent the
last, God, 30 years looking
for them in the various ways.
There are three ways that
we might see dark matter,
the direct way, which says that
dark matter exists literally
everywhere in this room, in our
laboratory, and the dark matter is
passing through the Earth like a wind,
and we put up detectors trying to see
those. We have done that,
and we've seen nothing.
- So we should say we have
done that for neutrinos.
- We've done that for many different types
of dark matter. We just simply put
detectors in labs deep underground,
and we can see neutrinos in them, it's
true, but dark matter would have,
especially heavy dark
matter, what these WIMPs,
They have a different signature,
and we've seen no evidence-
- Got it.
- ... of dark matter interaction
in these detectors.
- So neutrinos are also weakly interacting
and also- ... have mass, but-
- They are
- ... but not enough so WIMPs
are- ... heavy on the M.
- Right. Neutrinos are indeed WIMPs
of a sort. Now, we have to be
careful what we mean by WIMPs. They are
weakly interacting massive particles,
but we can calculate, and there's just
not enough mass in them. It's not it.
- Got it. Got it.
- So we need another form,
and we have seen zero
evidence of this wind of
dark matter through the
Earth. Another possibility is you
look where you think dark matter
might be concentrated at
the center of galaxies, and
if dark matter exists and
there's antimatter dark matter,
maybe they annihilate and make photons.
And so we look for gamma rays and
various other signatures of
annihilating dark matter, and there
are always constantly
announcements of, "Oh, we saw it. Oh, we
didn't. Oh, it..." You know, it's-- the problem
is that way of looking for dark
matter is hard because there
are other ways of making, for
instance, gamma rays like neutron
stars and stuff, and you really need
to understand the details of galaxies
really, really well to believe
that. And then the final
option is what I do, where we smash
particles together at high or
high energy. We try to make dark matter
particles. If you make dark matter
particles, because they don't
interact except via gravity, they
escape with your detector. So what you're
seeing, what you hope to see, is an
event where you collide
particles, a dark matter particle
escapes, and you don't see it, but
the recoil you see on the other side
because momentum is conserved. So you see a blob
of energy on this side, nothing on the other
side. Maybe that's dark
matter, and that also
happens with neutrinos. So you need to
understand everything about neutrinos and
calculate how many of those you see and then hope
you see more, and then that might be dark matter.
Again, that hasn't worked.
So we've ruled out some dark matter
particles, but the problem is
the range of space of possible mass, if
dark matter is of a particulate form,
the range of viable dark matter ranges
from something like the
mass of an asteroid to far
lighter than an electron
and everywhere in between.
And we have looked. We've ruled out some
little spots in that phase space, but that's a
big range.
- Is it really possible to miss a
particle the size of an asteroid?
- The astronomical searches were
not sensitive to that level of,
of dark matter, but, you know, then
you would expect that there would be
some of those in the solar system.
And if they're what we think, like
asteroids or something, then we'd heat
them up, and we'd eventually see them.
But if they're really, like,
truly dark matter, doesn't
interact with matter, which means
they wouldn't absorb energy from the
sun, so they'd be really dark. I don't
know. Maybe they're out there. But the only
way we searched for them was a
thing called microlensing. So
if a massive object, you
have a distant star,
and a massive object passes
between that star and your eye,
that star will momentarily brighten.
And so you just look for these,
what they call microlensing
events, and you count them, and you
see some. And we did see some. You
know, black holes pass in front of
stars, and we've seen them, but we just
haven't seen enough. And for very
low-mass particles like asteroids, they,
They just wouldn't make
enough brightening effect to
see. So there's, like, a minimum
sensitivity of brightening
and that about a third the
mass of a moon, our moon,
is about the sensitivity
that we had. So, you know,
that nobody, I think, really thought
that these low-mass guys were
likely. What they thought was more likely
they were just unseen black holes, which
I thought- ... you know, I
think is completely reasonable.
And then when that got ruled out,
I thought, okay, modified gravity
or or inertia. Well, now the, you know,
Bullet Cluster in Dragonfly seems to have
ruled that out. So I'm stuck in my head with
dark matter seems to be real, and
it-- we don't know what it is.
- And it makes up a giant percentage
of matter in the universe.
- It is-
- What is it?
- ... five times more prevalent
than ordinary matter.
- Wow. This is incredible.
- It is incredible.
- This is so fascinating.
- And that's why it's cool. So if
someone out there is, you know,
a young person who wants to get into
this, understanding dark matter is a
big deal. I mean, it's five times more
prevalent. The problem is, is as I
told you. If the mass is
ranging from an asteroid to far
lighter than an electron, if you
get on an experiment that looks at
one little range of mass, maybe
you weren't the lucky guy that
measured the right place, you know?
And that's one of the reasons why, as
fascinating as I think it is, I'm not doing dark
matter experiments because,
you know, if you make an experiment
that searches one mass range,
it'll be blind to another mass range.
So what you need is you need
many groups doing all sorts
of radically different experiments,
exploring all sorts of parameter space.
And with all that said,
until you see it, there still is
the possibility that maybe we don't
understand gravity or inertia right.
You know, you can't rule that out.
- If there is dark matter out there, you're
hoping it's actually somehow detectable.
- I mean, I don't know what it is. I
think it's cool. It's very, very
fascinating. That is one
thing I really do hope in my
lifetime is understood 'cause I'd
like to know the answer to that.
- And that's the thing that you
could-- there legitimately you could
see a discovery of-
- You gotta get lucky though. I mean, you gotta
look in the right place, whatever it is.
- Just imagine.
- Or you have to come up with that really cool
theoretical idea that everybody's overlooked,
which is another possibility. And
there are people who are really,
really religiously hating
dark matter, largely
because we've looked so hard
for so many years and the
experiments in today's world are
a million times more sensitive
than when I was a starting student-
... and they still haven't seen anything.
And that's why people really hate
dark matter. I mean, some of them-
... because they think we should
have seen it by now, but-
... you know I don't know.
- I mean, I'm a sucker for direct observation.
Not-- In-indirect is o-obviously also
really great, but direct, just
imagine pointing your telescope in a
certain direction and
because of some artifact of
cosmology being able to
directly detect a giant amount
of a thing that you could
say is dark matter.
- Yeah, you would see it
orbit, things orbit it.
- Yeah.
- Or it would- ... eclipse
things in front of it or-
- Yeah, like in an obvious way. 'Cause
some of the stuff you mentioned with
DF-2 and DF-4, those are
like brilliant indirect, um,
deductions that there should
be something like dark matter.
But some obvious, yeah, blocking,
occluding, this kind of thing.
- We did that in the '90s with experiments
called MACHO, OGLE, and some others.
They looked for a black hole that you
just can't see, you know, a black hole
you can't see. It's
perfect. It's a perfect
candidate for dark matter. And if there's enough
of them out there-- Now remember, there's
five times-
... the number of stars, which means there's a
whole lot of freaking black holes out there.
We should have seen them, and we didn't.
- What a grand mystery. We've covered
so many of them. I could talk to you
for a thousand more hours,
Don. Let me, if I can
ask you about a little bit more of a,
On the personal side. You have
a really inspiring life story.
Your folks didn't go to college.
Can you just tell me about your
childhood and where you found the love
for physics and science, and
maybe how you found your
journey to become a physicist, given
the, the context of where you came from?
- Well you know, I grew up a
poor kid in the boondocks.
Great parents, but not ones
that could guide me terribly
academically, but very very nurturing.
You know, my mom would laugh that she could
stop helping me math after like sixth or
seventh grade, you know. But they were
supportive. And there were a couple of things
that-- couple, three things I think that
folded into it. One is I was a voracious
reader as a kid. I loved science
fiction. I would read a book a day.
It drove my mother nuts 'cause she would try
to be nice. She'd buy me a book, and I'd say,
"Thank you," and the next day it'd be done.
You know, it just drove her completely nuts.
But anyways, but science
fiction is good for
fostering imagination, and so
that's precisely what it did.
In addition, and this is where the more
serious science came along, there were lovely
science communicators that
were popular in the 1970s,
Isaac Asimov, Carl Sagan, a guy
by the name of George Gamow.
They wrote books about science
aimed at a layperson. You know, as
a kid, I surely couldn't
read a textbook and
understand it, but I
could read and, you know,
get a hint of what science
was. And on top of that,
you know, I was, as most
people who became scientists,
irrepressibly curious about everything.
And I had sort of a quasi-philosophical
mind. I mean, I was interested in
things that, questions that have in the
past been theological and then
philosophical and now are more scientific.
Questions about how did the
universe come into existence?
Why is the universe the way it
is? Why are the laws of the
universe what we see them to be?
How will the universe-- Was it
created? How will it be destroyed? These
are, you know, big questions that have
bothered humanity for, well,
thousands of years. And so,
you know, I did. You, you said I had,
you know, philosophy and religion minors in
college, and I did 'cause I was curious about that.
Um, I was hoping that learning
that history might help me
understand these questions. And
it was in college where I came to
realize that the answers that I was
searching for were not to be found in
those directions, but I still learned
about how those questions have
been asked in the past. And so
I became a scientist, and the only
question was, was I going to be,
A cosmologist/astrophysicist-
... or a particle physicist? And
when I had to make that decision.
It was the mid-'80s, and at the time, there
were a lot fewer cosmology measurements.
There was an awful lot of thinking
about the universe and not
enough measuring. Whereas
with particle physics, by
God, you could do experiments.
And so the-- what attracted me
was the ability to actually get
an answer and not just mull
over what an answer might
be. And so I became a
particle physicist. It was
difficult without having,
you know, family mentors or anything like
that, but, you know, I managed. And that
actually is why, well, I'm here
and why I have spent a fair
bit of my time writing books
and so forth, because I figure
that there has to be some other
kid out there in Iowa or Kansas,
Montana, somewhere out in some
little town without a lot
of access to the kinds
of thing that people,
you know, who have highly
educated parents do.
And I'm hoping that, you know, some
of them will have read some of the
things I've written and will find
their own path forward, because
I found it very rewarding
over the years. And,
You know, I've been doing this
long enough that I'm sure
this is true. I've had kids
come up to me at the lab and
say, "Hey, I'm a summer intern because I saw
your video or read your book," or, you know,
whatever. So I know that
at least I've made a small
impact. I mean, I always would
like to do more, and, you know, I
appreciate the opportunity that your
audience affords me 'cause I think it's
important to talk about these
things. These are really cool,
fascinating questions. They are
unanswered, and they are just
waiting for youngsters to come
and spend some time thinking
about them, 'cause one of your
viewers might be one of the
people who answer these questions that have
stymied very smart people for decades.
- And we should also say that
you're a legit scientist.
So what-- we'll mention Sean
Carroll, who's a legit scientist,
legit physicist, but is also
a good science communicator.
Anyway, I did wanna mention, I don't
know if this is true, but I kind
of heard you talk about this, that when you
first showed up to Fermilab, you were, like,
working crazy hours, working extremely
hard- ... eight AM to midnight.
- I did.
- Uh, first of all, I love that.
Can you speak to what drove you
and maybe the value of hard work
in those contexts, in your early career
when you discover a thing
you're passionate about?
- Well, yeah. I mean,
obviously being smart, you know, if you're
Einstein, then maybe you can slack, I
guess. Although even he didn't do
that, but I'm not Einstein. But the
fact is, when I was young, and
I was unencumbered, no, no
family, no kids or something,
I couldn't imagine anything I wanted to
do more. I mean, some people, they wanna
go out to the club. They wanna, I don't
know, play soccer or something. But I
wanted to make measurements,
and I wanted to understand and,
and learn, and that was fantastic.
And so as a graduate student,
and this isn't for everybody, but I worked
outrageously. I would, from Monday
through Saturday, I would be at the
lab voluntarily because I
wanted to be from eight AM
to midnight, and on Sunday, I
would work from eight until about
five, and that's because from five
to midnight, I had to wash clothes
and buy groceries and things
like that. And I loved
it, you know. And I still
love it. I can't do that
anymore. But that's simply because
I have other obligations. But had I
been rich, I would've done the same thing.
You know, it's something I truly,
truly loved. And the-- I mean,
there is absolutely nothing more
fascinating to me than having a
hard problem and figuring
it out. And that, you know,
that work ethic-- Well, there's
a couple of things that separate
smart people from no-kidding scientists,
'cause all scientists are smart.
But the thing that separates, that
many scientists have is, A, a
drive and a real grit. The, um--
For me and for so many
scientists that I know,
trying to measure something and having
it not work just kinda ticks me off,
and I am not going to let the
universe in my lab or whatever
beat me. And, you know, some people- ...
they, you know, if the thing breaks, it's
like, "Oh, man, that didn't work."
And a lot of people, "Well, I'm gonna
go home. I'm fed up." Nah, it would
just kinda make me mad, and I'd put
more effort into it. And, you know,
not every-- I mean, okay, I was
crazy. I worked long hours. But I think-
... the people who are really good at
this will do maybe not that much, you
know. Some people have to have a
better life than that. But a lot,
because it's just you can't
imagine not knowing the answer.
And that if-- When, when you see that
as an older guy, you don't-- maybe not to that
degree, but when you see that kinda drive, that,
that intensity of trying
to get the answers,
you know that person's
a winner. And so if,
you know, some student
out there, if it doesn't,
you know, bring you joy, as
uh, what's her name? The
Japanese girl says, "If it doesn't bring you joy,
then it might not be for you." And then you could
be a person who reads about it and, you
know, is involved. But if you wanna be a
real scientist, it has to be
just part of what you are here.
- And by the way, it is a hard life,
but it is also a very fulfilling one.
So working hard towards the thing you
love is a really fulfilling way to be.
- I think that's true for an artist or
something, you know, anybody, a musician, you
know? Musician, they just keep
practicing because it is who they are.
- Mm-hmm. Well, I'm glad there's
people like you at a place
I admire, like Fermilab one of the many
places in the United States and the world
that is carrying the beacon of great
science and great engineering forward.
Uh, Don, thank you so much for everything
you do, for all the teaching you do,
online, for all the incredible
physics work that you
do at Fermilab, and thank you
so much for talking today.
- Thank you for having me.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with Don
Lincoln. To support this podcast, please check
out our sponsors in the description,
where you can also find links to
contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with
some words from Marie Curie,
a two-time Nobel Prize
winner, first in physics,
second in chemistry: "Nothing in life is to
be feared. It is only to be understood."
Thank you for listening. I
hope to see you next time.